================================================================================
LITTLE AMERICA
Aerial Exploration in the Antarctic / The Flight to the South Pole
by Richard Evelyn Byrd, Rear Admiral, U.S.N., Ret.
G. P. Putnam's Sons, New York, 1930

Source: Archive.org (https://archive.org/details/littleamerica0000rich)
OCR digitized 2023, Kahle/Austin Foundation
Cleaned for The Ceremony project, March 2026
================================================================================


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/littleamerica0000rich 


236 


a 


y EEG, 


binper 


ach 


Be 


ELYN BYRD. 
N 


y 


RICHARD 


Ret 


22 


ag Admiral, U $, 


Ke 


LITTLE AMERICA 


AERIAL EXPLORATION IN THE ANTARCTIC 
THE FLIGHT TO THE SOUTH POLE 


By 


RICHARD EVELYN BYRD 
Rear Admiral, U.S.N., Ret. 


WITH 74 ILLUSTRATIONS AND MAPS 


G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS 
NEW YORK LONDON 
1930 


1 f 


j LITTLE AMERICA 
A 
kope 1930 
by 
Richard E. Byrd 


First Impression, November, 1930 
Second Impression, November, 1930 
Third Impression, December, 1930 


2 


All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, must 
not be reproduced in any form without permission. 


SET AND PRINTED BY 
THE KNICKERBOCKER PRESS 


MADE IN THE U, 5. A, 


TO MY MOTHER 


ELEANOR BOLLING BYRD 


ae „m. 


FOREWORD 


THE efficiency of a polar expedition varies on the whole 
according to the adequacy of its preparations, the worth 
of its equipment and scientific gear, the services of its 
personnel and staff of scientists and the length of its stay 
in the field. These things require a great deal of money 
nowadays, and no explorer could possibly foot the bill on the 
strength of his own pocketbook. He is dependent upon the 
generosity of friends and the public. This has been true in 
my case especially, for the problem of financing two of 
my last three expeditions has fallen first upon me and then 
upon friends. This last expedition to the Antarctic was, for 
reasons explained in subsequent pages, a costly one. Prepara- 
tions for it were extensive, its equipment and scientific gear 
was new, modern and, in many cases, especially designed for 
the problem; its scientific staff was more than competent and 
the expedition itself was away from the United States for 
nearly two years. This was according to the original plan, 
the realization of which was possible only through the support 
of friends, who out of their keen interest in scientific re- 
search provided the sinews of exploration. 

To them, therefore, I must acknowledge my debt first of 
all. In a sense this is the debt of the nation, for the expedi- 
tion, which had for its immediate objectives the investigation 
of the south polar regions, had also as its purpose the ex- 
tension of national efforts in a field which had been sadly 
neglected, the Antarctic continent. 

So many names come into mind at once that it is difficult 
to know where to begin. 

There are, for example, Mr. John D. Rockefeller, Jr., and 
Mr. Edsel Ford. They were not only principal backers of 
this last expedition, but also of the North Polar expedition. 
What they gave me in friendship, sympathy and aid when 
things were darkest are beyond price. 

There are men and organizations that stand with them— 


vii 


viii FOREWORD 


Mr. Charles Evans Hughes, the Fisher brothers, Mr. Vincent 
Astor, Dr. John H. Finley, Dr. Isaiah Bowman and the 
American Geographical Society, Mr. K. H. Fulton, Mr. 
George Coe Graves, Mr. George A. Thorne, Jr., Mr. RAW: 
Bingham, Mr. Paul Block, Mr. Charles V. Bob, Mr. 
Robert W. Daniel, Mr. Charles F. de Ganahl, Mr. F. Fuller, 
the Daniel Guggenheim Fund for the Promotion of Aero- 
nautics, Mr. August Heckscher, Mr. George L. Johnson, Mr. 
Sam Katz, Paramount News, Mr. F. H. Rawson, Estate of 
Henry W. Oliver, Mr. Julius Rosenwald, the late Thomas 
Fortune Ryan, The Tidewater Oil Company, Mr. William H. 
Todd, Mr. Harold S. Vanderbilt, Mr. Donald Woodward 
and Mr. Robert S. Breyer. 

To the National Geographic Society and its officers, Dr. 
Gilbert Grosvenor and Dr. John Oliver La Gorce, I owe much. 
They assisted in the financing of the first expedition I accom- 
panied to the Arctic, and to this last expedition to the south 
polar regions they made a large contribution, in addition to 
supplying the services of one of our scientists. They stood 
squarely behind the expedition, ready and eager to help in 
every way. 

So, too, in the case of my dear friend, Mr. Raymond 
B. Fosdick. Time and time again, when the going was dis- 
couragingly hard he came to the fore and smoothed the way. 

To Mr. Adolph Ochs, publisher of the New York Times, 
Mr. Arthur Sulzberger and Mr. Frederick T. Birchall, both 
of the Times; Mr. Joseph Pulitzer, publisher of the St. Louis 
Post-Dispatch; Mr. David Lawrence, of the Consolidated 
Press, and the editors and publishers of the associated news- 
papers which published the reports on our expedition, I have 
a large obligation. They understood what we were up against 
and were always thoughtful and cooperative. 

There are as well the hundreds of American firms which 
most generously donated valuable supplies. And there were 
also hundreds of persons who helped the expedition in many 
ways—giving money, services and cooperation. Among these I 
include the hundreds of persons who made small contribu- 
tions to the expedition. 

There are many more, all equally deserving of mention, 
and it is a pity that they cannot all be mentioned. Merely 


FOREWORD ix 


to list the names would fill many pages; and my publishers 
are already in despair at the number that have thus far 
appeared. 

Yet I do not feel that the story of the expedition is too 
fully told. There are many things which, I have been informed, 
are not interesting to the general public but belong rather to 
the four fat volumes dealing with the scientific results of the 
expedition on which the scientific staff is now working. So, 
presto, out they go. 

Then, too, there are incidents which, because of their dis- 
tance from the main scene of operations, could not be in- 
corporated except as a very incongruous tail on a story the 
body of which is perhaps much too large. I have in mind 
such an incident as that which took place on the arrival of the 
Eleanor Bolling at Panama, in May, 1930, on the return home. 
It was the first time these men had set foot on American soil 
in nearly two years. They eagerly looked forward to their 
first holiday in two months after a blistering voyage across the 
Pacific. Yet when told, on landing, that the City, which was 
500 miles out, was shy of coal, beset by head winds, and far 
behind her schedule, they instantly volunteered to cut the 
holiday short and go out to her assistance. It made no dif- 
ference that they were short-handed themselves. Captain 
Brown and his crew put out to sea without hesitation; and 
Chief Engineer McPherson went into the fireroom and handled 
a shovel himself. 

This is typical of many such beautiful acts that are part of 
the memory of the expedition. It was the spirit of the men 
throughout. If only for that reason I regret the structural 
limitations of the book. And if I have failed to mention the 
names of any members of the expedition, I hope it will be 
understood that the omission was not deliberate. They were 
all worthy. 

But, here, the tail has become the head, the groans of the 
publishers are increasing and G had better desist with the hope 
that if I have left unsaid anything that should be said, it will 
be understood that the inexorable limits of space, as publishers 
measure it, have made it necessary. 

R. E. BYRD 


Chicago 
November 16, 1930 
2 A.M, 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER 
I.—NOTES FROM A JOURNAL 


P—Tne PLAN—THE PREPARATION AND THE PROBLEM 
P1.-Tnvochcn THE PACK 
IV.—WE ESTABLISH A BASE 


V.—THE BATTLE to UNLOAD 


VI.—DIscovery vy FLIGHT 
VII.—DiIscovery OE A NEw LAND TO THE EASTWARD 
VIII.—INcIDENT ON THE ROCKEFELLER MOUNTAINS . 
IX.—WINTER—BIRTH OF A CITY 
X.—CIVILIZATION DOES mot MATTER 
XI.—More PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 
XII.—THE START OF THE SOUTHERN PARTIES . 
XIII.—Tue BASE-LAYING FLIGHT 
XIV.—FLIGHT to THE SOUTH POLE . 
XV.—EAsTWARD BEYOND THE HORIZON . : ya 
XVI—DEATH oF A CITY 
XVII.—THE GEOLOGICAL SLEDGE TRIP 
APPENDIX e - 3 i E A 
INDEX . b A 4 A A ya > 


xi 


117 
139 
159 
188 
207 
238 
271 
305 
326 
340 
365 
393 
413 
417 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


FACING 
PAGE 


RICHARD EVELYN Byrp, Rear ADMIRAL U. S. N., Ket. 
Frontispiece 


Dr. LAURENCE M. GOULD, GEOLOGIST AND SECOND IN Com- 
MAND . 1 3 ; P A Ya +: 730 


Captain ASHLEY C. McKINLEY, AERIAL SURVEYOR AND 
THIRD IN COMMAND . 5 3 › ; : 4x36 


CAPTAIN FREDERICK C. MELVILLE, MASTER oF THE City of 


New York . : ; y ; 5 ; 3 pacu 
CAPTAIN GUSTAV L. Brown, MASTER OF THE Eleanor Boll- 

ing : 5 P - :  : 7 7 37 
THE Ross BARRIER . n ; ; : ya ya 2744 


A TYPICAL ANTARCTIC TABULAR BERG IN THE PROCESS 
oF DECAY y A ya c A 2 : 3 so di 


THE City TAKES GREEN WATER OVER THE WINDWARD 


KAP, i a A 2 ; i s - 7 3po 
Tne City of New York IN PACK ICE. » 7 Bao 
THE Eleanor Bolling IN THE PACK > A A eu 
THE City of New York at Discovery INLET . E 00 
AERIAL VIEW OF THE City of New York BERTHED ALONG- 

SIDE THE BAY ICE IN THE BAY oF WHALES . KAPO? 
Tue Docs, BLESS Em, WITH FAUL SiPIE, Boy SCOUT . 100 


A WEDDELL SEAL AND CRAB-EATER SEAL HAVE A SLIGHT 


DISAGREEMENT Ya ya ; 5 ya y i ATOI 
Whoo, INDEED, Bot THE EMPEROR PENGUINS! . ; 108 
ALL In A Day’s UNLOADING . ; : d ` . 109 


xiii 


xiy ILEUSIRATIONS 


FACING 
PAGE 


Doc TEAM ON THE Bay Ice, WITH PRESSURE RIDGES IN 


BACKGROUND . 2 ya ; i A ; x . 1128 
Tne Crew oF THE Eleanor Bolling . Y E E ‚ 120 
THE AVIATION MECHANICS 2 Y A Y : g 144 


THE Forp HANGAR, WITH Motvoy AND PARKER IN BACK- 
GROUND . A ; 2 ; : A 1 y . 144 


THE City AND THE Bolling UNLOADING ON THE BARRIER IM 


THE Bay OE WHALES . : + - A A l» 
SEA SMOKE 3 : A 3 E 5 x ya . 148 
UNLOADING THE Floyd Bennett FROM THE Bolling TO THE 

BARRIER 5 2 Ya : > : P - 140 
Tue Mess HALL, WITH THE NORWEGIAN HOUSE IN THE 

REAR UNDER CONSTRUCTION p ya ya : . 156 
“So Lone, Coop LUCK.” THE WINTER Party Bios CREW 

OF THE City of New York FAREWELL . . 1 «1527 
MEN aT WORK DURING BLIZZARD BUILDING TUNNEL u "160 
THE WINTER Party . : o: : 1 z not 


THE FOKKER ON A FROZEN LAKE At ITS BASE IN THE 


ROCKEFELLER MOUNTAINS . Ya + 5 A 70 
VICTIM OF THE WIND’s Fury . E t : e 21170 
LITTLE AMERICA - : ` - - i P P 
COMMANDER BYRD AT THE ENTRANCE OE THE HOLE LEAD- 

ING TO THE ADMINISTRATION BUILDING : U go3 
A FROZEN INFERNO . : : - - - : 103 
THE LoNELIEST CITY IN THE WORLD 3 A E . 208 
CHARLES E. LOFGREN, PERSONNEL OFFICER + : 4209 
GEORGE W. TENNANT, CHIEF COOK . - » 5 209 


Victor H. Czecka, MACHINIST - : - - . 209 


com, 
cha 


RUSSELL OWEN OE THE NEW YORK Times. 3 228 


MARTIN Ronne, TAILOR . 3 ; 5 : A . 228 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


THE Rapio DEPARTMENT . $ D A a 4 
THE MAIN SNOW TUNNEL 3 B Ya A > A 
BALCHEN AND STROM BUILD A SLEDGE K E y B 


Kotn, RUCKER AND JUNE AT WORK 5 4 > ya 


Dr. Francis Dana CoMAN ya b E 


WILLIAM C. HAINES i A 3 5 k A Ya 
FRANK T. DAVIES A 3 y 4 g A 5 : 
Coto WEATHER CLOTHING 2 x ya 4 d 


Bep vut 50 Hot”, b ya p : A : E 
Tne AVIATION PILOTS IN CONFERENCE IN THE LIBRARY 
RETURN OF THE SUN ? 3 Ya A 3 ya 


Doc Teams HAULING LOADS ON THE BARRIER AS SEEN 
FROM THE AIR e B À E A y d 


THE GEOLOGICAL PARTY . ya d ya Ya r ya 
THE GEOLOGICAL Party AT AMUNDSEN’S CAIRN ya E 
THE SUPPORTING PARTY ‘. Y 4 A b v 


Ge CAXAHI, AND WALDEN ON THE TRAIL COMMUNICATE 
WITH BASE . x x 4 a : E 3 6 


THE Eko OE A Lone HAUL - A A A 4 
THE CvEyA55E5 AT LAT. 82° 125. . - : A 
FISHER MOUNTAIN . : 3 P ya P 
THE SOUTH POLAR PLANE, THE Floyd Bennett . ; : 
Over “THE Hump” . ; ; E A A 
ON THE WAY TO THE POLE y : D y + 
THE PLATEAU IN THE NEAR VICINITY OF THE SOUTH POLE 
IN THE GRIP OF THE IcE AGE . k e E 3 Y 


COASTING DOWN THE GLACIER WITH RUTH @kDE ON THE 
RIGHT A r 3 D A 4 E 5 4 


xy 


PAGE 
228 
229 
236 
236 
237 
237 
237 
250 
257 


272 


273 


292 
293 
293 


300 


300 
301 
320 
321 
330 
337 
340 
341 
348 


349 


xvi ILLUSTRATIONS 


AN Ice ISLAND SEEN ON THE FLIGHT TO THE EASTWARD 
OPEN WATER IN TCE-COYEBEO LAND DEFIES THE [CE AGE 
AN UNUSUAL GLACIER OF THE EpsEL FORD RANGE 
WHALES TRAPPED IN A CRACK THAT SUDDENLY OPENED UP 


Am ANTARCTIC SKYSCRAPER VENTURES INTO THE BAY OF 
W HALES ; 3 P A A > 3 ya 2 


THE City IN Her TOUGHEST BATTLE ya 7 5 : 


A WELCOME SIGHT . " ya k 5 > ya ya 


MAP5 


LITTLE AMERICA, ANTARCTICA . E  3 K . 
FIELD OF OPERATIONS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SLEDGING PARTY 
Bay oF WHALES E P ya 3 : A A A 


MAP ok THE REGION FROM THE Ross SEA TO THE SOUTH 
Poge, SHOWING ROUTES og VARIOUS FLIGHTS AND 
SLEDGE TRIPS OF THE BYRD ANTARCTIC EXPEDITION . 


` 


FACING 
PAGE 


352 


232 


400 


416 


LITTLE AMERICA 


LITTLE AMERICA 


CHAPTER I 
NOTES FROM A JOURNAL 


1928 was probably the busiest year of my life. So the 
journal which I had promised myself I should keep, day by day, 
suffered in consequence. The few hours of quiet and isolation 
I had, generally came after midnight, on top of an exhausting 
day ; and these naturally found me wanting in the spirit to write ; 
the morrow invariably brought tougher problems. Neverthe- 
less I did occasionally find time to make entries in my journal; 
and from these I have been persuaded to select the following, in 
the belief that they may show by reason of their immediacy, 
some of the difficulties and hopes that attended us as we got 
ready to go south. 


I A.M. 
The Owl, en route Boston, 
Sept. 28, 28 


The time is up. We must be getting southward. The 
last dollar that I can beg is raised. Four ships, with most 
of our equipment on board, are already on their way, headed 
for New Zealand. In their holds and on their cluttered decks 
are over 500 tons of supplies and material; there are at least 
5,000 different kinds of things, ranging from thumb tacks . 
to airplanes; and every single thing is essential, in one way 
or another, to our unrelieved stay in the Antarctic. I hope that 
everything is there. There cap be no return now, We are going 


3 


4 LITTLE AMERICA 


into the largest non-shop area in the world, more than 2000 
miles from the nearest human dwellings, and for nine months 
out of every twelve shut off even from these by the impene- 
trable pack ice. So we stand or fall according to our prepara- 
tions here in Manhattan, nearly 10,000 miles away from our 
Antarctic base. A pity if we should become vitally dependent 
upon some trivial, forgotten things. Through my brain runs 
a provoking rhyme . . . “For want of a nail, the shoe was 
lost. For want of a shoe the horse was lost . . . I seem to 
have forgotten the rest, but the moral is clear anyway. No 
matter. We have done our best; if something is forgotten, 
some trifle necessary to the support of 82 men, for nearly 
two years, then it will have to be one of those things with 
which Providence bedevils humans who reach out for too 
much. For we have estimated, calculated and considered 
until heads whirled; we have divided and sub-divided to the 
nth degree; we have laid out our plans on a cosmic order, 
setting up, as it were, an ideal scheme—an expedition equipped 
with the most nearly perfect instruments for gathering in- 
formation in the most efficient and modern way; and these 
plans we have painfully contracted into the narrower, more 
modest limits fixed by the funds at our disposal, surrender- 
ing first of all the luxuries, the relatively least essential, until 
we got down at last to the hard rock level of irreducible 
minima. 

It has been a real fight, this battle of New York. Minor 
crises fell hard upon major crises. None of us has rested. 
Nearly all of us are exhausted. We have been stimulated by 
the knowledge that the battle ahead in the frozen world will 
be won or lost by the battle of preparation. We are not done 
yet—not by any means. There is still an immense debt.—I 
owe more money than I used to think existed. 

But debt or po debt, I must have’a few days at home, 
so Gat on my way. Merely starting is relief. 

Though my mood borders closely on despair there wells 
up a greater gratitude. My own friends and the American 
public have been surpassingly generous. Time and time again 
we felt the weight of our task carrying us sliding down the 
rope that leads to failure, only to find the burden lightened 
at the bitter end by the grace of some friendly act. 


NOTES FROM A JOURNAL 5 


But enough of this for now. Tomorrow I breakfast at 
home. 


At Home, Boston 
Sept. 30, 28 
Morning. 


Precious moments, these—very little time for note-making. 
Indeed, for the past ten years aviation, exploration, the Navy 
and public life have allowed me little time for anything, even 
home life. And now I am off again; this time op the longest 
errand of all, 

Knowing how often during the long Antarctic winter 
night my mind will come back to this place, I am cramming 
it with impressions, snatching them like a glutton. Yet 
even these last moments are crowded with outside influences, 
and the hands of the clock seem to be racing around—ticking 
away seconds that will not come again. 

What with long distance telephone calls, telegrams, news- 
paper reporters, friends, it has been impossible to keep even 
these last few days to ourselves. For the millionth time I 
have been pressed to draw my family and home life into 
newsprint. We do not want to do this. Marie is averse to 
publicity, and I must say that the reporters have been fair. 
However much they beg her and however provoked they may 
become over her steadfast refusal to be interviewed or, as 
one said, “humanized,” they nevertheless respect her attitude; 
she and the children now bear an almost charmed freedom from 
the camera. I have had reason on a hundred occasions to 
note the high sense of fairness and honor among newspaper- 
men. Nota few of them have shared my confidence; none has 
yet deliberately broken it. 

But here’s Dickie—he calls me. This notebook immedi- 
ately becomes nothing. Dickie, only eight, but already a 
perfect companion. 

The rascal has just surprised me with a gift of $4.35. He 
worked all summer, doing odd jobs, and saved his money, 
bit by bit. Gravely I told him that his contribution would 
help. “GU make some more, daddy, and send it,” he said. 

Were off now, Dickie and I, for our last romp and play 


6 LITTLE AMERICA 


together—a kite, a boat and an airplane. When I get back 
Be P be ten. 


Oct. 2, 1928 
Aboard Twentieth Century Ltd. 
En route San Pedro, Calif. 


Home is back there now—but no, rather it is two years 
ahead of me. It is more pleasant to look at it in that way. 
For then each day must advance me toward it, and not away 
from it. Yesterday was the last day. There were, of course, 
no goodbyes. A casual “so long” is so much better. The 
thing is living with me today, and I have not the will to de- 
scribe it. Of the three girls, only Bolling seems to have 
understood that I was going away for a long time, but what- 
ever doubts that knowledge gave rise to were speedily swal- 
lowed up in a vaster personal disaster. She cut her finger, 
and ran up, crying: “Daddy, I’m leaking. Stop me up.” 
Dickie was the little soldier he always is, at the end shoving 
shyly into my hand his most treasured toy. What a wonderful 
thing to have come close to the mind of a child! Hege is per- 
haps the most exquisite intimacy, and surely the most tranquil. 
For Dickie takes it for granted that all fathers adore sons, and 
all sons adore fathers. 

Tonight, as I have done on a hundred nights, I have asked 
myself : why are you doing this? Can it be that the joy you get 
out of exploring is the decisive factor in your plans, over- 
powering all other influences? 

This is a time of heart-sinking doubt. I must go it alone 
for no one can decide the matter for me. My mind knows 
what the answers are, but there is some obscure, perhaps 
ancient, voice within me tonight which instinctively interposes 
others. What a contradictory thing “instinct” is? Half of 
human instinct drives away from the center, and makes for 
enlarging the outline of what we know. Half of it drives 
toward the center, seeking to confirm and make secure the 
goods that are there. Life is made up of both things, explor- 
ing and establishing, a double swing of the pendulum. Some- 
times, as tonight, the instinct toward digging-in must have its 
chance to speak—not a homing instinct, for I am not far 
enough away for that—but a home-building instinct perhaps. 


NOTES FROM A JOURNAL 7 


trying to persuade one that happiness is identified with secur- 
ity, order, and steady work toward making things more perfect. 
But when intellect takes this instinct by the ears and compels it 
to listen to reason, it recognizes that security is never perfect, 
and therefore home-building is never finished, until we know 
all that is outside that charmed circle. Going away is a part 
of solid working at the center. And perhaps this is my par- 
ticular fate, to do my building in this roundabout way. “Man 
wants to know,” Nansen has said, “apa when he does not want 
to know he ceases to be a man.” 


Oc 2 20 
On Train en route 
San Pedro, Calif. 


My suit case lies open on the opposite seat—in it, and 
opened, is an old newspaper with the following headlines : 


Million Dollar Expedition 
Has Magnificent Equipment 


Costliest on Record 


Between the lines the thought lay implicit :—“plutocratic 
backing, lavish equipment, unnecessary luxuries, and elegant 
ease where hardships were once considered inescapable.” 

To the man who wrote the article, an attack on Antarctica 
with a shoestring would have been the desirable thing. There 
would then be more high adventure to it, more sport, more 
drama and so, more news value. I fear we shall pay for that 
impression. 

In polar expeditions of given conditions, the adventure 
involved varies directly as preparation. There is a saying 
among explorers that the more the amateur the greater the 
adventure. Conditions in the Antarctic, however, are suf- 
ficiently hazardous to involve risk—which is to say, adven- 
ture—even to the most carefully prepared expedition, Faulty 
preparation must certainly bring a high degree of risk, if not 
tragedy, were the expedition not even to venture from its 
main base. Tragedy may follow even with the best possible 


8 LITTLE AMERICA 


preparation. A knowledge of what has been going on behind 
the scenes, as well as the literature on the Antarctic, must have 
softened that man’s humor. 

He would then have known of an enormous debt—of 
creditors pressing us week after week, almost to the edge of 
bankruptcy, and loyal friends neglecting their own affairs to 
help us stave off failure. 

He would have seen no flock of plutocrats buying luxuries ; 
only a handful of impecunious men collecting necessities with 
painful economy. 

He would have known the mere fact of costs running up 
into six figures does not mean luxury. If the notion was 
drawn from comparison with the costs of other expeditions, a 
moment’s analysis must have convinced him that the difference, 
if anything, would not be against us. The dollar’s purchasing 
power has diminished considerably since the first great ex- 
peditions to the Antarctic. The cost of Captain Scott’s first 
expedition (1901-1904) was approximately $460,000, 1 of his 
last (1910-1913) at least $375,000,? and of Sir Ernest 
Shackleton’s second (1914-1916) about $400,000.3 

Moreover, we must take not only the best in pioneering 
equipment, but also the most useful apparatus that modern 
science and industry offers. The unique nature of the expedi- 
tion, in fact, demands the most expensive kind of transport 
thus far used in polar regions—the airplane. It requires the 
services of a highly-paid, well-trained personnel. The pay of 
the aviators alone will total $35,000, and the extra ship neces- 
sary to carry the airplanes and gasoline will cost several hun- 
dred thousand dollars to purchase and condition it for the Ant- 
arctic and for cost of operation. Ships are very costly things. 

No, we are not half so well fixed as this fellow believed. 

And there is the added thought that the past expeditions, 
as large as ours is, were usually supported wholly, or in 
large part, by governments, or divisions of governments ; 
whereas responsibility for the financing of this one is cen- 
tered in a single man. 

What a debacle if the creditors had forced us to the wall! 

*“The Voyage of the Discovery,” i, p. 30. 


? Hayes, “Antarctica,” p. 365. 
*Tbid., p. 265. 


NOTES FROM A JOURNAL 9 


Yet better a thousand times, we told ourselves, to face ruin 
in New York than accept the dreadful responsibility of starting 
south lacking a single bit of equipment, no matter what the 
cost, necessary for the safety of the men. 

The raising of money for polar expeditions is always dif- 
ficult. I have never known an explorer who was not either 
bankrupt or close to it. 


October 7, 1928 
Hotel 
Los Angeles. 


The telephone is disconnected at last. It is quiet here, 
for the first time in hours. Committees have gone, good- 
wishers, autograph hunters who flock, like locusts, to the 
feast. More than five hundred telegrams, most of them wish- 
ing “bon voyage,” are stacked up on the table. There is no 
time nor money to answer them, and that hurts. 

The devilish flu that threatened to upset everything is al- 
most gone. Fever is down and pulse normal. In fact, I 
feel quite fit. This is a good omen. 

Marie is best of nurses. We have seen more of each 
other during the past few days than in many, many months. 
It has made me realize more fully how very busy I have been 
during the past ten years. Tomorrow is our last day. Then 
I start south on the Larsen." 

I do hope they let us get away quietly and without too 
noisy a show. 


October 13, 28 
Aboard S.S. C. A. Larsen 
En route New Zealand. 


Headed southward at last. After years of anticipation 
and months of preparation. 

The moon on the water; the breezes whispering adventure 
ahead; then the storm, the water boiling; and above the wind 
the calm sound of the ship’s bell striking on the hour, voicing 
man’s indifference to the nature about him that can no longer 
shape him to its end; the wind slackens again to a whisper and 


*The Norwegian whaler C. A. Larsen. 


to LITTLE AMERICA 


the barely audible chug-chug of the engines feeding man’s deep 
yearning for mobility, carrying us to a new place, where wealth 
and fame and power count for nothing, and where men will not 
strut because there are no women about. 


October 16 


These last few days, I have simply rested and recalled. 
What struck me most, as the events of the past few years passed 
through my mind, was the difference between these last three 
expeditions and the first two. That is, the difference in the 
magnitude of operations, the methods of financing, and the 
distribution of responsibility. 

In the projected trans-Atlantic flight of 1919 and the 
MacMillan Arctic Expedition of 1925, of which I commanded 
the naval aerial unit, the powerful bureaus of the Navy De- 
partment shouldered most of the work and most of the re- 
sponsibility for the hazards of the flying. On the North 
Pole flight and this Antarctic expedition, the responsibility 
has been entirely mine. Responsibility for debts, mistakes, 
plans, execution of work and what is vastly more impor- 
tant—responsibility for the safety of the men involved— 
has fallen wholly upon a single pair of shoulders; whereas, 
in the case of a naval or governmental undertaking of the 
kind, such cares and responsibilities are distributed among 
120,000,000 persons. There are more than four score men on 
this expedition, ranging in age from 18 years to 68, from 
seamen to scientists. For every one of them I have a deep 
sense of responsibility. I shall have it with me, without re- 
lief, for nearly two years. 

This expedition brought me trying problems from the start. 
Of these, the problem of financing was perhaps the most 
difficult. The extensive scientific inquiry planned for the 
Antarctic, which alone could justify our going, required com- 
petent supporting forces. The cash necessary for creating the 
expedition, and keeping it in the field for the necessary period, 
was estimated, in the Spring of 1928, as approximately 
$750,000. We had begun to raise this money in the fall of 
1927, through public subscription and private contributions; 
by mid-summer approximately $500,000 had been raised. I 
knew that meanwhile we had run into unforeseen expenses, the 


NOTES FROM A JOURNAL (11) 


extent of which I did not learn until the last week in Sep- 
tember. I was in New York at the time. In seven days I 
hoped to leave for Boston. 

Hilton * met me at the office, after a night with his reports. 
Hilton had been put in charge of raising funds for the expedi- 
tion. When he spoke, he did not hold his punch. 

“I have a final statement to make on our debts,” he said. 
“We have a deficit of $300,000.” 

I had not expected it to be half as much The reasons for 
this were soon forthcoming. The cost and outfitting of the 
City of New York and the Eleanor Bolling had amounted to 
a small fortune—$165,000 for the first, $125,000 for the 
second. To build new ships would have approximately cost 
three times what I put into them. There could be no cutting 
corners in the matter of strengthening the ships for the struggle 
in the ice: this expenditure was absolutely necessary. I owed 
a fortune. And here I was, at the bitter end of my resources, 
dead tired, sustained during the last crowded days by the hope I 
should have the last few days at home. Well, I had to get 
that money ; though where, God only knew. 

While I sat pondering over this cruel turn of affairs, Hil- 
ton came at me again. “I have also learned this: an article is 
being written for a powerful syndicate of newspapers at- 
tacking the expedition for lavish equipment.” 

“Great,” I told him. “Now lets have some more good 
news. I need it.” 

Only five days—Monday to Friday night—in which to 
raise that amount of money. It was distressing to be forced 
to give up those seven days at home. They were more than 
just spilt milk, not to be cried over. 

I am in no proper frame of mind, even at this distant 
date, to record that struggle here. From early morning until 
late at night, I was at the most disagreeable job in the world, 
money-raising, begging it really is. I was fortunate. The 
debt was reduced to $184,000. The job, I confess, could not 
have been done alone. Loyal friends went to the bat for me, 
not once but many times. And to them I give undying grati- 
tude—small recompense indeed for what they have done. They 


1 Captain Hilton Howell Railey, manager of expedition affairs in New 
York City, and personal representative and friend of Admiral Byrd. 


12 LITTLE AMERICA 


made it possible to go ahead and saved me from abysmal 
bankruptcy. 

The day we sailed, in fact, yet another encouraging gift 
came. It was embodied in a telegram, which I have at hand: 


Replying to your request through Edsel Ford, Fisher Brothers 
are glad to contribute $50,000 to the fund of the great research 
expedition you are making. Kindly advise where and how funds 
should be deposited. Best wishes and success to you all in your 


great undertaking. 
I. P. FIsHER, 
Detroit, Mich. 


And so to you, Lawrence Fisher, and your brothers, 1 
also extend my deepest thanks. You cannot possibly know how 
much your gift has encouraged us. 

Still a debt in excess of $100,000. Ahead of us ex- 
penses of routine operation that will certainly amount to that 
much more. In the treasury hardly half enough funds with 
which to meet them. 

Unless we can raise the money, we shall have, then, the 
humiliation of debts and creditors.in a foreign land. 

I had determined at the outset not to leave the United 
States if a large deficit had accumulated. This decision had 
to be abandoned; the expedition gathered such momentum that 
it could not be stopped; for another month’s delay here must 
of necessity mean another year’s delay, and considerably 
greater expenditures in the end. But having set my course I 
shall go ahead with keen pleasure, for these difficulties are 
part of the problem and they will be met somehow. 

The situation nevertheless calls for determination and co- 
Operation on the part of all members of the expedition; and 
from Nature the most favorable of circumstances. If, for 
example, we should fail to get our winter base established on 
the Barrier there can be but one miserable ending—bankruptcy 


"Tite is the principal factor controlling the safety and quickness 
of passages through the pack ice which lies between the Antarctic Conti- 
nent and New Zealand. From Dec. 20th on, when the pack begins to 
break up and drift, a passage through to the Ross Sea can be generally 
found. Later than the first of March, however. the transit craft faces the 
probability of being “frozen in” it it can penetrate the pack at all. 


NOTES FROM A JOURNAL 13 


and disgrace. In expeditions of this kind success and failure 
are not nearly as far apart as the antithetical meanings of 
the words themselves would indicate. Failure of the pack ice 
to break up at a seasonable date, thus holding us back too 
long for the complete basing of supplies, or the presence of 
a speck of dirt in the airplane engines in flight—matters re- 
motely beyond human control—may well bring disaster at 
the beginning. 

The problem of using aircraft to the utmost advantage 
in the Antarctic has been discussed at length both at home 
and aboard ship. The use of aircraft in the Antarctic is ex- 
perimental, and its success unpredictable. Mawson, ? as early 
as 1911, proposed to use an airplane in the field, an R.E.P. 
monoplane, built by Vickers, with a special detachable sledge- 
runner under-carriage. It came to grief, however, in a test 
flight at Adelaide, Australia, nearly killing its pilot, and 
Mawson therefore abandoned the idea of attempting to fly in 
the Antarctic. 2 The fuselage was converted into a tractor 
for hauling sledges, in which humbler capacity it also failed. 
As a matter of fact, pioneering with heavier-than-air craft in 
polar regions could not have had more distressing circum- 
stances attending it than Mawson found at Adélie Land. 
Had not the excessively roughened character of the terrain 
at Cape Denison, on Commonwealth Bay, where he estab- 
lished his main base, been sufficient to preclude the possibility 
of a take-off, save under the most hazardous circumstances, 
the ferocity of the winds must have kept his craft permanent- 
ly under cover. For he discovered the windiest country in 
the world—‘“an accursed country.” * The average wind vel- 
ocity for the year was placed at 50 miles per hour; for hours 
on end blizzards persisted at velocities greatly in excess of the 
maximum op the Beaufort Scale,” reaching She phenomenal- 


1 Sir Douglas Mawson, perhaps the greatest living authority on the 
Antarctic, leader of the Australasian Expedition (1911-1914) and the 
Mawson Antarctic Expedition (1929-1930). 

2 Mawson, “The Home of the Blizzard,” i, p. 24. 

Ibid., ii, p. 10. “Ibid. i, D: 134. 

‘The Beaufort Scale is graduated from zero—a dead calm—up to 12 
—a hurricane oi 75 m.p.h. og more. The remarkable thing is that the 
wind pressure increases much more rapidly than the velocity. At 100 
m.p.h. the pressure is almost double that at 70 m.p.h. 


14 LITTLE AMERICA 


velocity of 116 miles per hour, July 5, 1913," and maintain- 
ing an average of 107 miles per hour for eight hours, jarring 
even the tightly bolted timbers of their hut. Gusts approaching 
200 miles peg hour were reported on She anemometer.* Such 
conditions must beggar the mightiest flying efforts of man. 

Of course we shall have no problem at our base in the 
Bay of Whales; although preeminently a windy continent, 
Antarctica has places of calm, and Amundsen assures me that, 
if we are eternally vigilant, our planes can be kept safely in 
flight and on the ice. The principal risks, as we see them, 
will arise from storms or from the impossible conditions of 
visibility met unexpectedly in flight, in landings away from 
the base, upon unknown ice terrain, and from the difficulty in 
properly securing the ship against the wind in connection 
with such landings. All three present food for serious thought; 
the third is perhaps our most difficult problem. A wind vel- 
ocity of 60 miles per hour is sufficient to give a stationary air- 
plane a true flying speed; at 100 miles per hour a terrific lift; 
at that speed the wind exerts a pressure of 23 lbs. per square 
foot, and unless securely anchored, a plane would be instantly 
hurled aloft and destroyed. Balchen 3 and Smith * are par- 
ticularly concerned with this problem; and they are now work- 
ing out a system of anchor lines and ice anchors. I have 
great faith in these splendid pilots. Both have superb records: 
—Smith, a pioneer pilot in the mail service, one of the four 
survivors, I am told, of the thirty-two pilots who opened the 
mail line between New York and Cleveland; he is now only 
31 years old. I have yet to learn to know Smith, but I be- 
lieve in him. When I met his mother I knew that he must 
have good stuff in him. Bernt Balchen and I have been 
through much together. He has never failed to meet what- 
ever test has come. Bernt is splendid. 

What uncertainty of the future I share centers principally 
about the matter of attempting landings away from the main 

* Mawson, “The Home oi the Blizzard,” ii, p. 149. 

MED, p. 133. 

° Bernt Balchen, former Lieutenant in the Royal Norwegian Naval 


Air Force, veteran of two Amundsen-Ellsworth aerial expeditions in the 


Pie: the trans-Atlantic flight of the “America” and the Bremen Relief 
ight. 


“Dean C. Smith. 


NOTES FROM A JOURNAL 15 


base. Our program demands several such landings in con- 
nection with the laying of depots for the main polar flight, 
and for reconnaissance expeditions of the scientists. Each of 
these landings must be attended with great risk, for conditions 
of visibility in the Antarctic are notoriously bad, ice surfaces 
are extremely difficult to judge from the air and there will 
be the constant threat of unseen crevasses. Even less at- 
tractive is the possibility of a forced landing. 

All of which gives us much to think about, even on the 
tranquil Pacific. We plan and discuss matters from early 
morning until late at night. At luncheon today we discussed 
merits of seal meat and pemmican as a constant diet. I de- 
tected in Parker, + who comes from Mississippi, the beginnings 
of a strong distaste for such food. There is a vast amount 
of work yet to be done—hundreds of letters and telegrams 
carried unanswered from the states, and much routine plan- 
ning for the expedition from New Zealand on. Duties must 
be allocated continuously, the program for the scientists finally 
drafted in detail, the plan of the wintering party prepared, 
and so on, seemingly without end. Lofgren’s typewriter 
seems rarely still. Good old Charlie. He is always an anchor 
to windward. 

I really am not greatly exercised either by our financial 
problems or by the task ahead. But wherever it can be done, 
my plan is always to substitute anticipation and preparation 
for worry. It is the unexpected that messes the plans of ap 
expedition of this kind. 


October 27 
Aboard S.S. Larsen 


Today we reached a most important decision. The 
original plan to send the Bolling and the City through the 
pack together we may now abandon. On the condition we 
do not delay his own passage, Captain Nilsen has agreed to 
take the City in tow through the pack, and as a result the 
Bolling need not risk her thin metal sides until later in the 
season, when ice conditions will be less hazardous. The new 
plan is to have the Bolling tow the City to the edge of the pack, 


1 Captain Alton Parker, Marine Corps, a member of the North Pole 
Expedition and a very competent pilot. 


16 LITTLE AMERICA 


where the Larsen will pick her up and give her a much needed 
boost to the Ross Sea. Thus many tons of precious coal will 
be saved. I have refused to consider the coal situation im- 
possible and here is the solution if it works out. After giving 
us all the coal we can handle the Bolling will return to New 
Zealand, take on cargo and follow through, probably three 
weeks later. What excellent luck! We had scarcely dared to 
hope for this chance! However, there is danger of count- 
ing our tows before they are made. Everything now depends 
upon the speed with which we can get the two ships to New 
Zealand, loaded and then to the pack. Captain Nilsen expects 
to enter the pack late in November, and he insists he cannot 
afford to delay passage on our account: the loss of a day’s 
fishing means a loss of about $30,000 worth of oil. 

The question is: can we hold up our end of the bargain? 
Frankly, I don’t know. The odds, in fact, are overwhelming- 
ly against us. According to the latest radios, the City is in 
the doldrums and logging less then fifty miles per day. If 
the whales get scarce north of the pack early in the season, we 
are licked, for then the Larsen will risk an early passage in an 
attempt to reach the better fishing grounds south of the pack. 
But in bending effort to meet her, we have much to lose if we 
fail and everything to gain if we succeed. 

The problem of basing in the Antarctic turns almost en- 
tirely upon coal. The vessels used for exploration work in 
the ice are generally too small to allow of a safe surplus of 
cruising radius. A large and powerful oil-burner would be just 
the thing for this kind of work: but where is an indigent 
explorer going to get the money necessary to build one? The 
problem we face now almost every Antarctic explorer faced 
in the past. The round trip between Dunedin and the Bay of 
Whales is approximately 4,600 miles. The maximum amount 
of coal we can allow the City is 150 tons below decks and 
another 50 tons on the deck. Steaming all day, she uses 
six tons, according to Mulroy’s! latest wireless; and as she 
averages under steam about 100 miles per day, she therefore 
has a steaming range of about 3,300 miles. Of course she 

*Chief Engineer Thomas B. Mulroy who was also Chief Engineer of 


the North Pole expedition ship, The Chantier. He acted also as fuel 
engineer of the Antarctic expedition. 


NOTES FROM A JOURNAL 17 


can eke this out with sail; but the danger lies in the fact that 
power is absolutely necessary in the pack. If we encounter 
nasty weather in the Bay of Whales, I fear she will be steam- 
ing much of the time until the unloading is finished. We 
shall certainly have to keep up steam for the month we shall 
lie alongside the ice at the Bay of Whales. 

With the expected relay of tows, however, the City should 
be able to enter the Ross Sea with bunkers almost full, and a 
sufficient supply of coal to see her through. 

I cannot begin to describe the many ways in which Cap- 
tain Nilsen has aided us. This quiet, soft-spoken and amaz- 
ingly competent whaling master has what is probably the 
loneliest job in the world. Every August he takes the Larsen 
out of Norway and down and across two oceans to the Ross 
Sea, an 18,000 mile journey to the last retreat of the whale; 
and May comes round before he sees his home again. Three 
months of that time he has the responsibility of the safety of 
his valuable vessel under conditions that would quickly break 
the spirit of a lesser man; but he appears to be a man with 
strength of purpose, a resolute mind and an acquired cunning in 
. ice lore that Nature’s violence could not bend aside. His knowl- 
edge of ice conditions is very extensive, and it is a pity it is 
not yet to be found in books, 

Attacking the pack is a matter no less involved from a 
tactical point of view than a military problem. The Continent 
is the objective, the pack is the enemy entrenched in front of 
it, and our ships are the forces with which the attack is pressed. 
“The White Warfare’! of the Antarctic begins with the 
pack itself, when it is first met on the way south, and the out- 
come is always in doubt until it is traversed on the way out. 
Thus far man has mastered it provisionally; but though he 
may run its gauntlet in the summer, he must ever treat it with 
respect as a dangerous enemy. In the winter it reigns supreme. 
Probably all the navies of the world together could not batter 
their way through. 

The time at which a passage is attempted and the place 
at which the pack is entered largely determine the conditions 
and duration of the passage. The first man to break through 
it, the distinguished British navigator, Sir James Clark Ross, 


*Shackleton’s “South,” preface. 


18 LITTLE AMERICA 


on January 5, at Long. 174° 34 E. entered the pack and four 
days later emerged in the clear, sun-lit waters of Ross Sea. 
Barely eleven months later—Dec. 18, 1841—when he tackled 
the pack at Long. 146° W., far to the east, it took him forty- 
four days to struggle through 800 miles of ice. 

The first of the many dreadful blows that were finally to 
overwhelm Scott fell upon him in the pack. The Terra Nova 
entered the pack, December 9, toto, on Long. 177° 41’ W., 
Scott having concluded that the 178° W.? meridian offered the 
best passage, only to be rewarded “by encountering worse cop- 
ditions than any ship has had before.” 3 December 25th, the 
Terra Nova was still in the pack, and Scott wrote in his diary: 
“We are captured. We do practically nothing under sail to 
push through, and could do little under steam, and at each step 
the possibility of advance seems to lessen. . . . Again the call 
is for patience and again patience.’ * The vessel did not get 
clear until December 30,° after twenty-one days in the pack, 
and as a result much valuable time Scott hoped to use in pre- 
liminary exploration was lost. 

This is the record from its gloomier side. The pack is 
often more amenable. Less than a month after Scott’s ill- 
favored entrance, Amundsen’s Fram reached the pack on Long. 
176° E., and four days later was in open water ip She Ross 
Sea—‘‘a four day pleasure trip,’ Amundsen described it. 
Shackleton’s Nimrod entering the pack on January 15, 1908, 
at 179° W., gained open water in thirty hours. The only 
thing about the pack I have been able to learn with certainty 
is its changeable nature. The danger of the pack is in get- 
ting beset and drifted to the Westward into the impossible ice 
that churns about the Balleny Islands. This is what we will 
have to watch and prevent. 

The sum of the written evidence as I had studied it, indicates 
quite clearly that the 178° east meridian offers on the whole, 
the easier passage through the Ross Sea, to the east and the 
west, apparently, the pack is denser and more tenacious. So, 
if we fail to make connections with the Larsen, we can be 


*“Scott’s Last Expedition,” i, p, 15. 

*Ibid., etc. i, p. 26. *[bid., etc. t, p. 26. 
3o ho BUR. e 1p14., i, p. 69. 
*“South Role,” i, p. 166. 


NOTES FROM A JOURNAL 19 


fairly certain of getting through the pack unaided toward 
the middle or the last part of January. Such a delay might 
very well mean the failure of our program. If the ice has not 
by then gone out of the Bay of Whales, we shall have a diffi- 
cult task to unload our stores. There will be no time for fly- 
ing. Both ships must be sent North before March. If they 
should become frozen in the pack, we should run great risk of 
losing the City and most certainly the Bolling. If the worst 
comes, I must face the possibility of freezing the City in for 
the winter, a notion neither to my plan or liking. 

Captain Nilsen is decidedly pessimistic about our chances 
of keeping the rendezvous. Generally by the third week in 
November, both the Larsen and the Ross are prowling about 
the edge of the pack, ready to seize the first promising lead 
southward. If conditions warrant it, he said, both ships will 
enter the pack at once. Although past experience is over- 
whelmingly against finding similar conditions, one of the 
large steel whaling ships forced a passage as early as the 
middle of November, several years ago, after unusually heavy 
winds, storms and currents had broken up the pack. 

At the risk of being ungrateful to our Norwegian friends, 
we are hoping that such will not be the case this year. The 
advantages accruing to the boost the Larsen can give us are 
immeasurable—the saving in coal, the gain in time may well 
mean the difference between large and mediocre accomplish- 
ments. If the pack holds firm until as late as the first week 
in December, we have an excellent chance. 


Aboard the S.S. Larsen 
October 30th 


It is trying to have the expedition scattered all over the 
Pacific, in four ships separated by hundreds of miles of sea. 
This is past helping now. How much better it would be if 
we could have afforded to build a single ship large enough to 
do the job. Every man would then have a sense of being 
part of a whole organization, would come to know the other 
men with whom he must work during the next year and a 
half, and, more important, might gain thereby a proper valu- 
ation of the job itself. With the exception of the scientists and 


20 LITTLE AMERICA 


several of the aviators, I doubt whether a dozen men on this 
expedition have any idea of the difficulties that face us. It 
is only natural that they should not. Very few know any- 
thing about this new world we shall enter into. A good many 
of them appear to think it is no more than an heroic journey, 
with opportunities galore for valorous deeds, high adventure 
and the like. They will have a rude awakening: heroism and 
coal shovels are not yet identified in common in their minds, 
but in the Antarctic it is only by prodigious use of the latter 
and of allied implements, such as the snow shovel, that at- 
‘tainment of the former state is possible. 

` The thought has occurred to me repeatedly that we are 
strangers. Scarcely a score know each other except by name 
and reputation. ` Drawn together by the common wish to 
participate in the expedition, these eighty odd men have been 
shoved, with scarcely a pause for introduction, into this lengthy 
journey, some of them on two highly odoriferous whalers, the 
rest of them on our own ships, one of them ancient, the other 
uncomfortable, and both of them small. The differences that 
separate us have been marked even in the group aboard the 
Larsen. Of the fourteen men with me, only one, Russell 
Owen, 1 calls me by my first name.” It has already been neces- 
sary to rebuke one man, an officer in the military, for high- 
hatting one of the men who happens to be in the enlisted ranks. 
This officer is not to blame. He hasn’t had time to learn 
that special privileges will not obtain on this expedition. An 
expedition allows of no social differences. “It is the man that 
counts, here as everywhere,” 2 as Nansen says; but especially 
here. 

Where is there another organization knit together as this 
ope? QOutwardly it appears to lack the factors that make for 
stability and cooperation in civilization. There can be no 
promotion for work well done—no increase in pay. In fact, 
money scarcely enters into it. Many of the men are either 
volunteers or else receive only what is necessary to support 
their families during their absence. None of them could be 
paid for the service he will render. Nor can there be any 
lawful punishment for a misdeed or failure. There is no 


*Mr. Russell Owen, correspondent of the New York Times. 
? Amundsen, “The South Pole.” introduction. 


NOTES FROM A JOURNAL 21 


brig, with bread and water diet. There can be no court- 
martial for disrespect, or over-staying liberty, or desertion. 
There is only one thing holding us together, disciplining us, 
identifying us from any other collection of persons on the 
high seas. It is the fact of loyalty. Loyalty not only to a 
common purpose; but loyalty according to the various ideals 
we live by: loyalty to family, to country, to men, even to self, 
and to God. In this affinity I place my hope. There is no 
other bond on earth save this that will see men through an 
Antarctic winter night and the other experiences that lie ahead 
of us. 

As a group, the men represent all that I had hoped for. 
Choosing men for a trip like this is a ghastly responsibility. 
I know now what Scott, Shackleton, Amundsen and Mawson 
_ went through; if I fare as well as they, I shall be lucky. Men 
are at once the strongest and the weakest links in the chain. 
The performance of machinery in the face of given conditions 
can be anticipated with accuracy; but what men will do is past 
prophecy. The man who Scott thought would outlast all 
others was the first to collapse. ; 

The idea of selecting men according to their faces alone 
is one of the most fantastic notions yet swallowed by the race. 
Whoever claims to be able to judge his fellow men by their 
faces is an optimist. The face shows certain things, it is 
true, but you must live with a man for a long time, see him 
as he stands and thinks in relation to rapidly altering con- 
ditions; and even then you have no certainty: only the prob- 
ability that he will act in the future as he did in the past. 
I have taken but one man on his face—Captain McKinley,’ 
and in his case a very splendid record in the U. S. Air Service 
more than bore out the first impression. His is the one case 
in ten thousand where nobility shows unmistakably in his face. 

The rest of the men, save for the handful who served 
me on other expeditions, were taken according to their records 
and abilities. They come from everywhere, and appear to 
have done nearly everything. Dr. Laurence M. Gould is a 
full-fledged professor, with two summer Arctic expeditions in 
his biography. Dr. Coman was a staff surgeon at Johns Hop- 
kins. During the World War he served four years with the 


* Ashley C. McKinley, aerial surveyor. 


22 LITTLE AMERICA 


French Army. McGuinness, a citizen of Ireland, the mate on 
the City, is an adventurer of the vanishing type. He seems to 
have taken a very impartial part in the war, having fought both 
in the English and German armies. When the mood is on him, 
he talks of occasional anti-social activities such as gun-running. 
He is hard, courageous and resourceful, able to do a great 
many things well. He was a General in Ireland and has 
commanded blockade running ships. Vaughan, Crockett and 
Goodale—already labelled the Three Musketeers—were at 
Harvard, when they decided to go south: more than a year 
ago, they resigned and spent the winter in New Hampshire 
hills learning to be dog-drivers. At least two young men are 
the sons of millionaires. The oldest and most experienced 
man on the party is Martin Ronne, a Norwegian 68 years old, 
whom I can see from my desk as I write: he is a veteran of 
several of Amundsen’s expeditions. It was a silken tent he 
made, left behind by Amundsen, that Scott found at the South 
Pole; and of him Amundsen wrote: “he was ope of those 
men whose ambition it is to get as much work as possible 
done in the shortest possible time.” t I have begun to under- 
stand why Amundsen recommended him. I doubt if I will ever 
come across again another man like Ronne where work is con- 
cerned.. He goes at it with concentration all day long for 
fear he may waste time by a false move. He is probably the 
greatest craftsman in polar clothing to be found anywhere. 
I hope the rest of his countrymen shape up as well as he does. 
There are seven of them, all splendid men, it seems to me. 
They are to act as dog-drivers, instructors in skiing, mates 
and as ice pilots. 

Everything more or less turns upon the men. To ex- 
pect that all of them will come through, nearly two years 
hence, with untarnished records would be silly; the law of 
averages alone would argue to the contrary. I can only 
hope that the man whose misfortune it is to fail will have 
the manhood to hold himself to blame. Dissatisfaction spread 
by a single man can infect an expedition as a stone, cast into 
water, soon disturbs its whole surface. I know a little about 
every man on the expedition; there will not be many slackers 
among them, even when the going is hardest. The Antarctic 

“The South Pole,” i, 135. 


NOTES FROM A JOURNAL 23 


is like war in one respect, as Cherry-Garrard has said, “There is 
no getting out of it with honor as long as you can put one foot 
before the other.” 1 


Thus, the journal, which was thereafter, I confess, too 
neglected for, and I too busy to give it, more than random 
impressions jotted down in haste. A sentence often had to 
do for a day’s complicated details; a paragraph for a week’s 
vicissitudes. But now, in the leisurely quiet of the New 
Hampshire hills, I have had time to go back, to pick up the 
threads of the narrative; to see things steadily and to see 
them whole, with all things done and all hopes and fears 
having run out their sand. From this point of vantage it is 
possible to see the two years more clearly, with less prejudice 
and more sureness, through the first planning, then the prepara- 
tions and, finally, the field work itself. 


3 Cherry-Garrard, “Worst Journey in the World,” introduction. 


CHAPTER II
THE PLAN, THE PREPARATION AND THE PROBLEM


THE PLan.—My interest in the South Polar regions dates 
far back and seems always to have been synonymous with the 
names of Scott and Peary, of whom I had heard a great deal 
in my youth. The notion that I should like to go there re- 
curred to mind with greater frequency, in later years, and, 
as I became connected with aviation, with increasing enthusi- 
asm. But the plan, which I had secretly worked out, was not 
spoken of until the night of May TOP, 1926. It is a date not 
likely to fade from memory; for the two men who shared 
it with me are dead, having later sacrificed their lives in an 
attempt to aid fellow pioneers. 

That night saw the late Floyd Bennett and me at Spits- 
bergen. A few hours earlier we had completed the first flight 
by air to the North Pole and back; weary and glad, we had 
returned to our base, where we were greeted by my friends, 
Captain Amundsen and Lincoln Ellsworth, who themselves 
momentarily expected to fly in the Norge to Alaska, over our 
tracks to the Pole and then beyond. We had a splendid 
dinner that night. Toward the end, Amundsen and G drew 
together. “Well, Byrd,” he said, smiling, “what shall it 
be now?” Half humorously, half seriously, I replied: “The 
South Pole.” Amundsen’s face instantly became serious. 

“A big job,” he said, “but it can be done. You have the 
right idea. The older order is changing. Aircraft is the 
new vehicle for exploration. It is the only machine that can 
beat the Antarctic. Look here!’ And he began to plan; he 
talked soberly and gravely, as if the fatigue and the buffet- 
ings of his magnificent journey! were still op him, and 


z Captain Amundsen was the first man to reach the South (geographical) 
Pole, attaining it Dec. 14, 1911. 


24 


PLAN, PREPARATION AND PROBLEM 25 


naturally his advice was good. He suggested several capable 
Norwegian men; he offered the use of some of his equipment; 
he suggested the ship I was to use—the Samson 1-- "Che best 
bargain for that kind of a job you can find anywhere.” 

Most earnestly he warned me to look to my men. ‘Men 
are the doubtful quantities in the Antarctic. The most 
thorough kind of preparation, the shrewdest plan, can be de- 
stroyed by an incompetent or worthless man.” In the same 
temper, but different words, the warning was repeated to 
me by a distinguished British explorer, an executive officer 
on Scott’s last expedition: “The first man who starts trouble 
of a disloyal nature deserves the worst death you can think of.” 
Another advised: “The first man who shows disloyalty should 
be handcuffed and kept so until the return to civilization.” 
A disagreeable procedure, but nevertheless the code of the Ant- 
arctic. On expeditions of this kind, a good man is priceless; 
a disloyal man is soon found out, and his comrades live to 
damn him and rue the day he was born. 


THE PrEPARATION.—Actual formation of the expedition 
was held up until I completed the trans-Atlantic flight for 
which I had already made arrangements. That accomplished, 
the work of setting up the apparatus with which every ex- 
pedition functions was begun. It was some months before we 
could afford to establish a headquarters. Our first head- 
quarters consisted of a small room on the 15th floor of the 
Putnam Building, 2 West 45th Street, New York. There 
was room in it for a desk and typewriter, a cabinet file and a 
couple of chairs. This was in the mid-winter of 1928. Within 
a few weeks the expedition had expanded so much that we 
were compelled to seek larger quarters, taking a suite of rooms 
at the Hotel Biltmore, the use of which Mr. John McEntee 
Bowman generously donated. A corps of staff assistants, 
under the direction of Brophy, whom I appointed business 
executive of the expedition, began scouring the world for the 
highly specialized equipment needed. One of my tasks was 
that of raising money, a beastly job, which I shouldered until 
toward the end, at which time I engaged Captain Railey, a 
former army officer and business man, to take over the job 


* Later renamed City of New York. 


26 LITTLE AMERICA 


while I was south. He also acted as my personal represent- | 
ative. A better and more conscientious man I doubt if I could 
have picked. 

The thing grew and grew; by the spring of 1928 it was a 
highly organized business functioning at top speed. It had 
to be; our time was limited. August had been set as the 
date for the departure of the City of New York, September 
for the Bolling, and the second week in October as absolutely 
the latest date for the departure of any unit or supplies from 
the United States. As it was, we barely beat the deadlines. 

Transport was, as always, the first consideration and the 
last. The difference between good transport and bad is the 
measure of the difference between great success and failure in 
polar exploration. Our plans proposed the enlistment of three 
types—sea, ice surface and air. Each had to be selected with 
a view to its particular fitness to very demanding problems. 

The task of selecting a good vessel was much simplified 
by the kindly offices of Amundsen. On the strength of his 
recommendations, I purchased the Samson by cable at Tromsoe, 
Norway, and ordered her sailed at once to New York. She 
was a stout vessel, with the spirit and tradition that Conrad 
might have loved. She was old, as ships’ ages are measured, 
but not in strength. Although built in 1882, she was nearly 
as strong in 1928 after we reconditioned her as the day she 
first put out with the sealing fleet that plies in the pack ice 
north of Spitsbergen. When we took her over she was a 
barkentine, with yards on the foremast; nondescript sails 
rigged on the mainmast, and a fore-and-aft rig on the mizzen. 
We re-rigged her, and made her into a bark by putting yards 
on the mainmast. She carried auxiliary steam power. So she 
was a bit of everything; not beautiful, as square-riggers can 
be, but she had the stuff. Though she was very small, the 
scale on which she was built was herculean. Her hull was of 
thick spruce and oak, of the finest growth. The ribs, which 
were also of oak, were so thickly set amidships that a man 
could not thrust his hand between them. Inside, the ribs were 
sheathed with a layer of heavy planking; outside them lay 
another layer of planking, and on top of that yet another 
layer of greenheart. Her sides were 34 inches thick, to with- 
stand the direct, encircling pressure of ice; and the garboards 


PLAN, PREPARATION AND PROBLEM 27 


along her keel were 41 inches thick, to give her protection 
against longitudinal stress in case she might be caught by ice 
under bow and stern and lifted smartly. She was an ice- 
ship, in every meaning of the words. Her designers, how- 
ever, had built into her massiveness full and rounded lines 
to give her elusiveness in avoiding the crushing embrace of 
Arctic ice. Like the Fram her hull was of a form that offered 
no particularly vulnerable point to the ice, but would instead 
convert its horizontal pressure into lifting the ship. Thus she 
might escape the “squeeze” she could not directly oppose. And 
thus this tiny old wooden ship could live in ice that could sink 
the mightiest battleship. 

But the City had one great drawback—her low horse- 
power, and, therefore, low speed and small cruising radius. 
She could scarcely generate 200 horsepower. We were 
fortunate that an engine built in 1882 would run at all, for 
we had neither the funds nor the time to equip her with 
new engines. How much better off we would have been had 
we been able to install a Diesel engine which burns oil and gives 
a tremendous radius of action. 

On this windjammer, then, the burden of our long- 
distance transport rested. It was her job to penetrate the 
immense belt of ice at the gateway to the Ross Sea early in the 
season, and to get us through in time to have all supplies un- 
loaded before the Bay of Whales froze over. 

One other drawback of the City was her smallness—a 
fact vividly impressed on me as the Leviathan, one hundred 
times her size, drew abreast of her the day she left New York, 
August 25th. Our white little ship, rolling lazily in its wake, 
her yards clashing, was so dwarfed by the towering black sides 
of the Leviathan that the contrast was painful. Even could 
she have spared the room, there was no space on her decks 
sufficiently large to accommodate the fuselage of all our air- 
craft. The City is rated at 515 tons, with a length of 170 feet 
and beam of 31 feet, and her chunky thickness made her 
appear even smaller. 

Moreover, with advancing age her carrying capacity had 
diminished considerably. Her dead-weight, for example, was 
greatly increased as a result of water soaking into the old hull. 
As a matter of fact, the Resolution, one of the ships which 


28 LITTLE AMERICA 


Cook sailed into high Southern latitudes in 1772, had a greater 
carrying capacity than our City. 

Without aviation we might have managed with a single 
ship. The second ship was the Chelsea, a freighter of 800 tons 
cargo capacity. She was not much larger than the City, having 
approximately the same length and beam. Her top speed was 
nine knots. We purchased her because she was cheap, avail- 
able and suitable for the job we had in store; otherwise, I 
candidly confess, she had little to recommend her. She was 
put in dry dock, where she underwent extensive repairs, princi- 
pally looking to strengthening the forward part of her iron 
hull against a fatal blow from the pack ice. The choice of the 
Chelsea, which we re-named the Eleanor Bolling, was signifi- 
cant, in that, ours, so far as I know, was the first exploration 
party to risk a metal hull in or south of the pack. 

I came in for much criticism when I announced my inten- 
tion of taking the Bolling to the Antarctic. But I had studied 
the matter carefully and was convinced that it could be done. 
The success or failure of the expedition hung upon this point. 
Captain Gustav Brown would have grave responsibility. 

There was, however, prior experience to justify the choice. 
Steel-hulled Norwegian whalers of the type of the C. A. 
Larsen and the Sir James Clark Ross, had made seasonal 
passages through the pack to and from the Ross Sea without 
accident. Immense vessels, they can call upon their vast 
reserve of horsepower to escape from a threatening squeeze, 
and thus by sheer force avoid the clashing pressure which might 
sink either of them in a very short time. Moreover, they un- 
dertake the passage only when conditions are favorable; when 
the warming sun and drift of mid-summer have broken up the 
ice and offer a maze of open leads. Whether our little ship, 
with its puny engines, * could thus play hide-and-seek with the 
squeeze was the question. There was this difference. The 
Bolling had to get through. For she was to carry the airplanes 
and equally indispensable supplies. 

The cost of outfitting these two ships, including the origi- 
nal price, was approximately $285,000. This work was done 
at cost, as an act of friendship, by Mr. William Todd at the 
Todd Ship Yard. This represented a considerable saving, 


"The engines of the Bolling were rated at 200 h. p. 


PLAN, PREPARATION AND PROBLEM 29 


The distinguished naval constructor, Captain Gatewood, offered 
to superintend the refitting, and he and Mr. Todd’s son, Her- 
bert, and engineer, Bill Smith, rendered us invaluable services. 

When she arrived at New York, the City was in woeful 
condition. I never believed a ship could be so run down. It 
was necessary to make new sails, her entire rigging had to be 
renewed, a new boiler installed, rotted planks in her hull 
replaced, and the whole ship, from stem to stern, refitted and 
strengthened. This preparation was costly, but of course it 
was necessary. 

No doubt it would have been better in every way had we 
seen our way clear to build new vessels, constructed especially 
with the Antarctic navigation problem in view; but new 
ships are very expensive, and such advantages are luxuries 
denied all but a few expeditions. To have constructed new 
ships for the same purpose to which our second-hand craft 
were turned would have cost at least half a million dollars, 
an expenditure which was obviously out of the question. 

I confess both ships gave me several distressing nights, 
even before the expedition really got underway. The stout- 
hearted City came very near ending her days on the Atlantic. 
Her skipper was Captain Dietrichsen, a sea-going man of the 
old school, with a love for sail that he appears to have for 
no other thing. Skipper Isaak Isaaksen sailed the City from 
Tromsoe, her home port, to Oslo. From there Dietrichsen 
brought her across the Atlantic. She was then under sail and 
steam; and so long as her screw turned the chief engineer had 
considerable to do with the running of the ship—more than 
the skipper cared for. 

A few hundred miles off the English coast, the City ran 
into dirty weather; and while straining against heavy seas, 
her boiler buckled. Why it didn’t burst, no one will ever 
know. If it had the explosion would have sent her to the 
bottom. Power gone, she came around by the head; seas 
washed over her incessantly and she seemed ready to succumb 
to the next wave. A less imaginative man than Dietrichsen 
might have accepted it as the beginning of a disaster; but he, 
instead, accepted it as the ordained severance of a disagreeable 
arrangement. By heroic measures, he fought out the storm 
and then continued westward—under sail. The engineer had 


30 LITTLE AMERICA 


become a supernumerary. The trip consumed nearly three 
months; having no wireless, Dietrichsen could not report the 
accident ; she was long overdue, and as each day passed without 
word from her, we began to fear she had been lost. She was 
finally sighted off Newfoundland, becalmed, and the skipper 
was replenishing his much depleted larder with fish caught on 
a hand-made hook. 

Dietrichsen’s description of his emotions at the time of 
the accident is worthy of all the traditions of sailing masters. 
“Worried? Damn, I was so glad those stinkin’ engines were 
stopped I could have brought her back alone. You can't 
mix sail and steam.” 

The Bolling had a spectacular run from Brooklyn to Nor- 
folk, Va. She put out from the former port Sept. 16, and 
off Cape May was boarded by a coast guardsman, as a rum- 
running suspect, an experience that made us feel more than 
ever for her dowdy lines. The day she left, I took a train 
to Norfolk, intending to meet her there and superintend the 
loading of stores assembled there. Most of the crew were vol- 
unteers—green men, few of whom had ever been to sea— 
and I was anxious to see how they would stand up under the 
trip. She was due at Norfolk: She next day, Monday, in 
the afternoon. 

Monday came and went, and she failed to appear, nor 
was there any radio from her. This was most surprising, as 
Malcolm Hanson and Howard Mason, expert radio engineers, 
had assured me they would get messages through. 

Tuesday morning—still no word from her. I became 
alarmed. 

About ten o’clock a.m. I was called to the telephone. The 
caller identified himself as an amateur radio operator. He 
said he had picked up the Bolling and she reported she had a 
very urgent message for me. Communication, however, broke 
down, and he was unable to raise her again. He gathered the 
message was in the nature of an S. O. S. 

As if the situation was not already grave enough, a 
hurricane of great force, one of the worst in years, was 
reported to have struck the Gulf of Mexico, and was working 
its way northward up the Atlantic Coast. Tuesday afternoon, 


PLAN, PREPARATION AND PROBLEM 31 


it struck our coast with prostrating force. There was no 
word from the Bolling. 

The things I could do at Norfolk were painfully circum- 
scribed. There was no way of determining the whereabouts 
of the Bolling; she might have been anywhere along 300 miles 
of coastline. I ordered an airplane sent south from New 
York, to survey the coast down to Norfolk; but bad weather 
turned it back. I stood by the radio for thirty-six hours with- 
out a break. I was in constant touch with the Navy Depart- 
ment and the Coast Guard Headquarters at Washington. 
Neither of them had had word. 

Seven o’clock Tuesday night, the captain of a seagoing 
Navy tug reported that he had caught a glimpse of the Bolling 
in Hampton Roads. She was laboring heavily, he said, but 
apparently anchored. But whether she was out of commission ; 
whether she was dragging anchor and headed for shoal water, 
he was unable to say. Thick weather allowed him only a 
fleeting glimpse. The seas were rough. We could tell that 
at Norfolk. Water filled the main streets, having been blown 
up by the storm, and traffic had stopped. 

In this crisis, I appealed to Admiral Burrage, Commandant 
of the Naval District, and within a few hours he had dis- 
patched a tug to the Bolling’s assistance. They found her in 
Hampton Roads. She had dragged her anchor some, but 
otherwise was safe. The next morning she came into Norfolk 
under her own power. The report of her skipper, Captain 
Brown, was terse. After passing Cape May, a 70 miles-per-, 
hour hurricane bore down upon her; and in the sliding, 
whirling, spinning fireroom the greenhorns assigned to stoke 
the fires either fell violently ill or useless. Despite the efforts 
of Chief Engineer McPherson, and his assistant engineers, 
Leland Barter, Elbert Thawley, and John Cody, steam fell 
rapidly, headway was lost and the force of the wind drove 
the ship landward. McPherson himself shoveled coal during 
this time with the strength of a Samson. A great many times 
this loyal chief was destined to shovel alongside his own fire- 
men. In the crisis, two of the scientific staff, Captain Mc- 
Kinley and Dr. Haldor Barnes, the assistant medical officer, 
volunteered to take the places of the stricken firemen. Neither 


32 LITTLE AMERICA 


had ever handled a coal shovel before; but with great courage 
and determination they managed to keep the fires going. At 
this point the breakdown of the generating plant made the 
radio apparatus effective only for reception. Hanson could 
pick up my messages, but not reply to them. Making barely 
five knots, with steam low, the Bolling passed Hog Island, made 
her way to Cape Henry and finally gained the shelter of the 
Roads. All in all, they were very trying days; and our two 
“white collar” scientists were very exhausted men. 

Affairs like these made our work of preparation in the 
United States anything but monotonous. 

Months of thought and experiment were expended in the 
building up of our air forces. Our largest plane was a Ford tri- 
motored all metal monoplane. My selection of a three engined 
plane for the major transport and investigative operations in 
the Antarctic was governed wholly by reasons I have repeatedly 
made public in the past—an ability to maintain flight in the 
event of failure of one engine, and a lengthened gliding angle 
if two should fail, conditions of load and wind being favorable. 
Although such a plane, by reason of an aerodynamic law toc 
complicated to explain here, is scarcely 65 percent as efficient 
as a single-engined plane of equal horsepower, the added 
factor of safety, plus the necessity of carrying on every im- 
portant flight a heavy load of scientific equipment and emer- 
gency gear, made this type the essential vehicle. The latter 
factor was even more important than the former. 

It has been our first intention to power this plane with 
three Whirlwinds;'! but my friend, Charles L. Lawrance, 
president of the Wright Company, had developed the more 
powerful Cyclone engine, which is rated at 525 horsepower. 
We mounted a 525 horsepower Cyclone in the nose, using two 
Whirlwinds outboard—that is, under the wings. This gave 
us a total horsepower of nearly 1,000—200 horsepower more 
than the stock plane, a top speed of 122 miles per hour, a 
cruising speed of from 110 to 116 miles per hour, an easy 
load capacity of 15,000 pounds. 

More power was necessary to enable us to meet the prob- 
lem of hurling this plane, on the main polar flight, over the 


* The famous Wright J-5 used on the trans-Atlantic flight; nine 
cylindered, air-cooled, rated at 220 h. p. 


+ 


PLAN, PREPARATION AND PROBLEM 33 


passes through the enormous mountains 1 buttressing the polar 
plateau. Having decided that the aerial gateway to the Pole 
would be found approximately in the vicinity of the point where 
Amundsen made his ascent, we knew in advance, from his 
reports, the approximate nature and dimensions of the con- 
ditions with which we must contend. The Ford, accordingly, 
was carefully redesigned 2 to meet them. 

Weight, of course, was the consideration, first, last and 
always. And because it was apparent, from the day I made 
my first calculations, there would be scant discrepancy between 
the total amount of load we should absolutely have to take 
and the total load the plane could lift, we began shaving ex- 
cess poundage from the start. We saved in the construction 
of the plane. By use of a lighter skin, we saved 235 pounds; 
by using celluloid instead of glass in the cabin windows, 80 
pounds; by omitting cabin trim, 155 pounds, and cabin chairs, 
94 pounds. We saved 564 pounds in the structure alone. 

Two other planes were acquired, for reserve, for use of 
the scientists in the field, for transport—in short to provide us 
with a surplus of effective machines to insure the carrying 
out of the program of scientific inquiry if one, or even two 
machines were wrecked. These included a Fokker Universal 
monoplane, 3 with a 425 h. p. Pratt and Whitney Wasp engine, 
and a Fairchild folding wing monoplane.* We carried also a 
small plane manufactured by General Aircraft. 5 

The experience we had had with the use of skis on air- 
craft in connection with the North Pole flight was invaluable 
in the preparation for the antarctic problem. Long before 
the expedition sailed from the United States, Floyd Bennett 
and Bernt Balchen flew to Canada and tested various types of 


‚ *The Queen Maud Range. Peaks in this range are as high as 10,000 
to 19,000 feet. 

*The Ford was a factory transport plane, type 4-AT. Its other meas- 
urements were: span over all, 70 ft.; length over all 49 ft., to inches; wing 
area, 785 sq. ft. 

“The dimensions of the Fokker were: span over all, 74 ft., length over 
all, 49 ft, to inches; wing area, 733 sq. ft. Powered with a 425 h. p. 
Pratt and Whitney “Wasp” engine. 

“The dimensions of the Fairchild were: span over all, 50 ft.; length 
over all, 32 ft., 10 in.; wing area, 332 sq. ft. Powered with a 425 h. p. 
Pratt and Whitney “Wasp” engine. 

* This plane failed to reach the Antarctic. 


34 LITTLE AMERICA 


skis on the snow. During the early stages of preparation, 
Bennett planned the aviation equipment which was used in 
the Antarctic. His death deprived me of a judgment, loyalty, 
and determination in which I always had implicit faith, Had 
he lived, he would have been second in command. 

Our surface transport was more in keeping with Antarctic 
traditions. Our dogs were mostly Greenland huskies, of 
the breed and blood with which some of the greatest marches 
in the polar regions have been made. Seventy-nine of these 
came from Labrador, and were donated by Frank W. Clark, 
of the Clark Trading Company. Sixteen dogs came from the 
farm of Arthur T. Walden, at Wonalancet, among them the 
famous “Chinook.” These were heavy draught animals, of 
his own breed, with a splendid record in transport. 

In addition, we proposed the usual experiment with motor- 
ized surface transport. The choice, in our case, was a Ford 
snowmobile. It had a powerful engine mounted upon cater- 
pillar treads, which it was hoped would prove useful in towing 
sledges to the various depots in the preliminary unloading 
operations and, perhaps later, in the laying of southern depots. 

For the balance of our preparation and supplies, there is 
space for no more than a summary. The outfitting of the 
expedition was hard work; for many months all of us had 
to serve as jack-of-many-trades. We were alternately cartog- 
rapher, dietician, purchasing agent, fund-raiser, haberdasher, 
aircraft expert and many other things. In each of these 
activities I was ably assisted, and often wholly supported, by 
the men whom I placed in charge of various departments. 


* Shackleton on his first, Scott on his last, and Mawson on his first 
expedition all attempted to use surface machines. Shackleton used an 
automobile, with an air-cooled, 4 cylinder Arrol-Johnston motor. (“The 
Heart of the Antarctic,” i, p. 23.) But its wheels repeatedly sank and 
spun futilely in soft snow. After repeated experiments with rubber tires 
and cog-like treads, Shackleton was forced to abandon it only a few miles 
out on his main journey (p. 249). The failure of Mawson’s motorized 
sledge, with propeller attachment, has been described (see footnote, p. 21). 
Scott took three motorized sledges to the Antarctic. One was lost in the 
unloading at the base (“Scotts Last Expedition,” i, p. 73) when it 
fell through the ice; and the remaining two, after thoroughly disappoint- 
ing performances, broke down in the early stages of the Southern 


o the dream of great help from the machines is at an end” 
pot): 


PLAN, PREPARATION AND PROBLEM 35 


The work of Dr. Francis Dana Coman, of the surgical staff 
of Johns Hopkins Hospital, was especially valuable in the 
creation of the Commissary. Although biologist and bacteri- 
ologist by designation, this brilliant medico took over the job of 
dietician, and with it the responsibility of keeping the expedi- 
tion healthy and strong during the stay on the ice. Commissary 
Steward Sydney Greason did splendid work in the procuring 
of our food supplies. His wife was a most enthusiastic helper 
and the expedition owes her much. George Tennant, who was 
the Chief Cook of the North Pole Expedition, helped to work 
up the amounts of food required. Food was selected accord- 
ing to its vitamin value; and the considerable advances made 
in the science of dietetics enabled us to formulate an excellent 
diet, monotonous perhaps, but wholesome, strength-giving and 
economical. We had the inevitable pemmican in large quan- 
tities. This was made according to Amundsen’s formula, and 
he, in turn, developed it from “emergency ration” prepared 
for the Norwegian Army. 

Pemmican is absolutely necessary on sledging journeys, 
because of its compressed nourishment. A man engaged in 
hard physical labor usually consumes between four and five 
pounds of food per day, of which half is water. The water 
content of pemmican is less than three percent ; the sledging ga- 
tions of the British Antarctic Expeditions, for example, were 34 
ounces per man per diem. Pemmican makes an important sav- 
ing in weight. The weight of ordinary meat would be pro- 
hibitive for long sledge journeys. Our pemmican was pre- 
pared for us at Copenhagen; it was one of the last things 
Amundsen did for me. It came to us in blocks of half a pound, 
wrapped in tinfoil, and these blocks in turn were packed in 
unit boxes of 25 pounds. This uniform weight and size ren- 
dered it easy to pack and to count out. Pemmican is hardly a 
food for a fastidious man: it is greasy and rich; but explorers 
on the march, who are of necessity on reduced rations, soon 
come to look upon it as food fit for the gods. Nowhere in 
literature has food been so rapturously beatified as in Shackle- 
ton’s praise of the ever-thinning “hoosh” that sustained him 
and his party on their starvation-dash to within 97 miles of the 
Pole. 

We took precautions against scurvy, which had weakened 


36 LITTLE AMERICA 


several Antarctic expeditions. The Insulin Company, at 
our request, undertook a series of experiments on rats and 
finally announced the development of a dried fruit powder, 
containing the vital vitamin C, which, it was promised, would 
prevent scurvy. We also took large quantities of lime juice, 
crushed orange juice ahd lemon powders. A3 I had hoped, 
these preventatives proved unnecessary; taking a leaf out of 
Peary’s book, we stocked up with fresh seal meat before winter 
set in, and got through without a single symptom of scurvy. 
I want to acknowledge here the debt we owe to those polar ex- 
plorers who by their suffering and sacrifices taught us how to 
prepare. 

In the selection of radio equipment, the Navy Department 
and New York Times were especially valuable. I suppose this 
single department received more attention than any other, for 
our program called for the most elaborate system of communi- 
cation ever proposed in a Continent where radio conditions are 
notoriously Bad. The necessity of constantly directing the 
various units of the expeditions in the field—the ships at sea, 
the dog teams on the Barrier, the aircraft in flight—as well 
as maintaining communication with the rest of the world 
compelled us to procure the best equipment available. As 
we were truly pioneering in this field, there was an excellent 
chance of acquiring much new information about radio-mag- 
netic conditions in the Southern Hemisphere, especially with 
reference to the mysterious heaviside layer which does queer 
things to radio. 

In spite of assistance from the Navy, the New York 
Times and several commercial corporations, the radio became 
very costly. This was another heavy expense with which 
former expeditions were not saddled. We took with us five 
radio engineers. Malcolm Hanson was assigned to the ex- 
pedition by the Navy Department. He is a very capable 
engineer and a veteran of the North Pole expedition. Mason 


* Mawson experimented with radio between Cape Denison and his 
base unit at Macquario Island with indifferent success; in summer, con- 
tinuous daylight limited wireless operations to a few hundred miles at 
best, and the effective working distance for all times of the day was not 
above 100 miles (“Home of the Blizzard,” ii, p. 36). Scott, on his last 


expedition, set up a telephone connection between Hut Point and Cape 
Evans, a distance of 15 miles. 


CAPTAIN ASHLEY C. MCKINLEY, AERIAL SURVEYOR AND THIRD IN COMMAND. 


"Buo 40upa] AHL yao "lod many fo (po AHL 40 
chyatbyyt ‘NMOUG "1 AVISAN kgypayo SALSY “yatullyap{ ‘O xogchchayach NIvidvy 


PLAN, PREPARATION AND PROBLEM 37 


had built and used radio sets in the Arctic. Grenlie was an- 
other veteran of the Polar expedition. The fourth man was 
Carl Petersen, a splendid Norwegian with an adventurous 
nature. Lloyd Berkner was assigned to the expedition by the 
Department of Commerce. He is an able and enthusiastic 
radio engineer. 

When the minimum requirements for the expedition over 
a period of two years were finally arrived at, it immediately 
became necessary to increase everything by half. Upon us, as 
upon all previous expeditions to the Antarctic, there fell the 
obligation of providing for a second winter’ on the ice, in 
case the relief ships should be unable to get through in 1930. 
That meant preparing for three years in the field. 

As the supplies accumulated, they were assigned to the ships 
that were to carry them. Everything bought and stored was 
carefully recorded and indexed, so that the amount and its 
whereabouts would be determinable. The midnight oil burned 
over this job was considerable. The loading of the City began 
first. Owing to her low speed, it was necessary that she 
leave the United States well in advance of the Bolling; we 
hoped—too optimistically, it turned out—she would make the 
trip to New Zealand in less than three months. With 200 tons 
of material aboard, and a crew of 33, she put out from 
Hoboken, August 25th, 1928, and made for the Panama 
Canal. Her master was Captain Frederick Melville, a sailing 
man of excellent reputation who, in the face of the times, 
had not deserted sail. McGuinness was first mate. Frank D. 
Davies the physicist of the expedition, and Henry Harrison, a 
meteorologist assigned by the U. S. Weather Bureau, went as 
ordinary seamen—no easy berth on a bark rigged ship. 

The Bolling, under command of Captain Brown, put out 
from Norfolk, Virginia, exactly a month later. She carried 
300 tons of supplies and a crew of 28. Aboard her were 
several of the scientific staff, including Dr. L. M. Gould, the 
geologist, William Haines of the U. S. Weather Bureau, who 
proved to be a godsend on the North Pole Expedition, and 
Captain McKinley, the distinguished aerial mapper. 

A third detachment went aboard the Norwegian whaler Sir 
James Clark Ross, which took on Mr. Walden, the dog-drivers, 
Norman Vaughan, Eddie Goodale and Fred Crockett, and 


38 LITTLE AMERICA 


ninety-four dogs at Norfolk, as well as forty tons of dog 
biscuits. By sending the dogs on this much faster vessel, it was 
possible to reduce considerably the time they must endure the 
tropical heat on the Pacific. They would have suffered greatly 
on our small crowded ships. We owe much to Magnus Konow, 
the Norwegian whaling director, who generously provided us 
with this transport. Anticipating the difficulties that the 
operation of unloading would involve, I wanted to take the dogs 
to the Antarctic in the best condition possible. 

The fourth detachment of the expedition was on the 
Larsen. At Norfolk she took aboard the four airplanes, the 
aviation gas and oil, about 100 tons of supplies and the aviation 
personnel. The task of clearing up ultimate details as well 
as reducing the deficit left me no alternative save to remain in 
New York up to the last minute. Brophy, Russell Owen, Ralph 
Shropshire, assistant to the scientific staff, Sergeant Benjamin 
Roth, assigned by the U. S. Army, Willard Van der Veer and 
Lofgren, who accompanied me across the Continent, boarded 
the Larsen at San Pedro. October roth, she put out to sea. 

So the second week of October saw all four units on the 
Pacific, widely scattered, but all hurrying southwestward as 
fast as their varied speeds would allow, toward the concentra- 
tion points at New Zealand. I was reminded of a naval force 
converging for a distant action. The entry in my journal of 
October 14th, the fourth day out on the Larsen, shows that 
on that day the City reported its noon position as halfway be- 
tween Panama and Pitcairn Island, far to the southeast; still 
farther south was the Ross, making excellent speed; and the 
Bolling had the Galapagos Islands abeam. 


THE PROBLEM. Any discussion of the Antarctic problem, 
except perhaps in scientific circles, soon comes up hard on the 
question: “ . . . but what’s the use of it? What’s the value 
of snow and ice so many miles away?” It is sometimes diffi- 
cult to answer what earthly purpose the great white con- 
tinent serves. It is not that the answer is necessarily lacking 
in logic or conviction; more often it is that the asking mind 
has not turned its thought in that direction; for the most 
unpracticed student in polar history must soon sense its great 
significance. We lack, most of us, the universal, philosophical 


PLAN, PREPARATION AND PROBLEM 39 


point of view. As is natural in our own crowded affairs, 
we see things narrowly, especially in a matter such as this, 
in trite, personal and commercial terms of worth. Antarctica, 
“a vast wonderland laid out on a giant scale, in which little- 
ness has no place,” cannot be judged, or appraised, according 
to limited values. Vainly did I try to impress this fact upon 
a well-known American business man. “But where’s the 
money in it? Where’s the profit?” he demanded. 

Candidly, at this moment the Antarctic is sleeping, so 
far as we can calculate its value to modern civilization. But 
nd one, except God, can tell how long it will remain sleeping. 
Cook, over a hundred years ago, returning from his magnifi- 
cent journeys in high southern latitudes, exclaimed that if a 
southern continent was ever found, it must remain a continent 
without a future. “Countries condemned to everlasting 
rigidity by Nature, never to yield to the warmth of the sun, 
for whose wild and desolate aspect I find no words; such are 
the countries we have discovered; what then may those re- 
semble which lie still further to the South? . . . Should anyone 
possess the resolution and the fortitude to elucidate this point 
by pushing yet further south than I have done, I shall not 
envy him the fame of his discovery, but I make bold to declare 
that the world will derive no benefit from it.” 1 But now, ip 
summertime, its waters swarm with Norwegian whalers who 
annually harvest a revenue of $15,000,000 from their catch. 
Immense beds of coal were hinted at by Shackleton’s dis- 
coveries,? Scott found copper, è there was iron in the “tey 
mountain” that Shackleton climbed in search of a highway 
leading to the Pole. * Economic minerals were found by Maw- 
son’s party at Adelie Land, 5 and Scott’s Northern Party, under 
command of Prof. T. Edgeworth David, found titanium on 


1Mill, “The Siege of She South Pole,” p. 85. 

° The Heart of the Antarctic,” i, 327. 

sAt Cape Bernacchi, pure quartz in situ with large lumps of copper 
in it—“the first find of minerals suggestive of the possibility of working.” 
“Scott’s Last Expedition,” i, p. 411. 

«ETpe Heart of the Antarctic,” i, 307. 

Mawson, “The Home of the Blizzard,” i, p. 110. Iron, copper and 
molybdenum—“The ores were present in small quantities, but gave promise 
of large quantities in the vicinity and indicated the probability of mineral 
wealth beneath the Continental ice cap.” 


kam 


40 LITTLE AMERICA 


Depot Island, a place he described as “truly a most wonderful 
place geologically, and a perfect elysium for the mineralogist.” 
These, to be sure, are remote possibilities. There is a much 
richer oge to be mined immediately in terra incogmita. 

Dr. Mawson has said: “The polar regions, like any other 
part of the globe, may be said to be paved with facts, the 
essence of which it is necessary to acquire before knowledge of 
the special zone can be brought even to provisional exactitude. 
On the face of it, polar research may be said to be specific 
and discriminating, but it must be remembered that an ad- 
vance in any one of the departments into which, for conven- 
ience, science is artificially divided, conduces to the advantage 
of the whole. If we ignore the facts contained in one part of 
the world, surely we are hampering scientific advance.” ? 

The fascinating fact about the great southern continent, 
whose area has been estimated at five million square miles, is 
that its existence was definitely proved only ninety years ago, 
and it has been under intensive investigation for only thirty 
years. “Even now the Antarctic is to the rest of the earth as She 
Abode of the Gods was to the ancient Chaldees, a precipitous 
and mammoth land lying far beyond the seas which encircled 
man’s habitation, and nothing is more striking about the 
exploration of the Southern Polar region than its absence, for 
when King Alfred reigned in England the Vikings were navi- 
gating the ice-fields of the North; yet when Wellington fought 
the battle of Waterloo there was still an undiscovered con- 
tinent in the South.” 3 

From the Greeks comes the name—anti and arktos, mean- 
ing “opposite the bear,” or polar region; and as the Greeks 
knew the earth was round, it is possible they used the word 
Antarctic, * to describe a continent balancing a north polar 
region of which they knew and thus give symmetry to their con- 
ception of a spherical earth. But for hundreds of years the 
Antarctic problem was no more than a philosophical concep- 
tion. From the middle ages on, however, the notion of a vast 
southern continent, Terra Australis 1 ncognita, laid hold of the 


*“Scott’s Last Expedition,” ii, p. 104. 
* Mawson, “Home of the Blizzard,” i, p. 6. 
* Cherry-Garrard, “The Worst Journey in the World,” 


‘ : E introducti ii. 
Dr. Hugh Mill, “Siege of the South Pole.” Dy en 


PLAN, PREPARATION AND PROBLEM 41 


imaginations and ambitions of cartographers and explorers 
alike, and maps of the period show it in grotesque shapes and 
connections. It was assumed to be inhabited by millions of 
people, fertile, rich in gold and silver, temperate, and possess- 
ing the other qualities which the empire-searching seafarers of 
the Mediterranean always hoped to find. 

They pressed southward, one after another, in their cockle- 
shell ships, ever believing that with the lifting of a new 
parallel of latitude the mysterious southern continent would 
come into view. Diaz, pushing toward the southern coast of 
Africa in 1487, found a living people, a temperate climate, 
and gave impetus to the quest. But de Gama, rounding the 
Cape of Good Hope (1497), found to his sorrow an illimitable 
sea to the south. Drake pressed through the Strait of Ma- 
gellan (1578) ; and after being repelled by storm, sailed about 
Tierra del Fuego with a boundless ocean on his right hand, 
thus stripping the imaginary southern continent from any con- 
nection with America. 

One by one the great navigators felt out Australia and 
New Zealand, New Guinea and Tasmania, and found always 
the ocean beating on the southern coasts. But hope died hard. 
“The most celebrated and modern sovereign will be he who 
gives his name to the southern world,” De Brosses, president 
of the Parlement de Dijon, wrote in 1756. So, as the space it 
was hoped the continent occupied steadily contracted, and the 
oceans guarding its approaches were seen to become more 
fierce, belief in its actual existence began to wane. It remained 
for the distinguished British navigator, Captain Cook, to hint 
at its reality and its terrifying nature. 

Cook, in circling the globe in high southern latitudes, re- 
moved the notion of a circumpolar continent from the realm 
of fiction and proved that if it existed at all, it must be well 
south of the 6oth parallel. In 1772, Cook sailed from England 
with two ships, the Resolution, of 462 tons, and the Adventure, 
of 336. Cook based at New Zealand. Sunday, Jan. 17, 1773, he 
crossed the Antarctic Circle at Long. 39° 35’ E., the first such 
crossing ever made. For a month he cruised an open sea, meet- 
ing icebergs and drifting pack, until stopped at last by an im- 
penetrable pack. Lest he be beset, he retreated north, returning 
south again the following December. Twice he traversed 


We LITTLE AMERICA 


the Antarctic Circle, seeking a channel through the pack; but 
each thrust came up hard upon vast stretches of ice. Captain 
Cook wrote: 

“T will not say that it was impossible anywhere to get 
farther to the south; but the attempting it would have been a 
rash and dangerous enterprise and what, I believe, no man in 
my situation would have thought of. It was, indeed, my 
opinion, as well as the opinion of most on board, that this ice 
extended quite to the Pole, perhaps joined some land... 
but if there is, it can afford no better retreat for birds, or any 
other animals, than the ice itself. I, who had ambition not 
only to go farther than any one had been before, but as far 
as it was possible for man to go, was not sorry at meeting this 
interruption. .. .” + 

The next half century witnessed efforts of a different 
character. No longer seeking rich empires, but, instead, the 
more immediate wealth of fur-bearing seals, Yankee and 
British sealers, fighting for new and virgin fishing grounds, 
pressed farther and farther south through the ice in ramshackle 
and scurvy-ridden ships. The Falklands, South Georgia and 
South Shetlands were discovered. In this inhospitable vicinity, 
one misty morning in 1821, the Russian circumnavigator, Ad- 
miral Bellingshausen, in search of a continent, came upon the 
sail of the worthy Captain Palmer of Stonington, Conn., and 
found, to his surprise, the Yankee master well acquainted with 
this little known part of the world. 

The period of actual discovery found three men—the 
Frenchman, D’Urville; the American, Wilkes; and the Eng- 
lishman, Ross,—on the very edge of the Continent within a 
year. D’Urville was off first, with two corvettes, and after a 
futile attempt to gain the Continent southeast of the South 
Shetlands, sailed from Hobart Town in 1840. He discovered 
Adélie Land, a far-reaching expanse of ice cliffs, on an islet 
adjoining which his men saw a fragment of rock which scien- 
tists hastily broke up for specimens. While off these coasts 
he met one of Wilkes’ ships, the Porpoise. Wilkes’ expedition 
was authorized by an Act of Congress, May 18, 1836. It con- 
prised six vessels; two sloops-of-war, the Vincennes, of 780 
tons, and the Peacock of 650; a brig, Porpoise, 230 tons; the 

*Cook, “Voyage Towards the South Pole,” p. 268. 


PLAN, PREPARATION AND PROBLEM 43 


Relief, a store ship, and two pilot boats, the Sea Gull of 110 
tons and the Flying Fish of 96 tons. The personnel comprised 
345 men, 83 officers and twelve civilian scientists and attachés. 
The expedition put out from Norfolk, Va., August 18, 1838. 
After an unsuccessful sortie south of the South Shetlands, the 
expedition based at Sydney Harbor, December 26, 1839, the 
squadron sailed to the south ice pack. Despite his ill-equipped 
ships, Wilkes fought his way to the rim of the Antarctic in 
1840 and claimed the discovery of an immense extent of Con- 
tinental land. Whether he made this discovery is something the 
British still seem to doubt. Scott? and Captain Davis,? of 
Mawson’s expedition, have further shrunk his claims. It has 
always seemed a pity to me that the American government 
failed to follow up the work of this gallant officer, who had 
the courage to undertake the great responsibility of this mis- 
sion. I personally am convinced that Wilkes discovered land. 
My friend Sir Douglas Mawson, than whom there is no greater 
authority, has told me that he believes that Wilkes saw land 
of the Antarctic Continent. 

No such doubts imperilled Ross’s claims. Under orders 
from the Admiralty to locate the South Magnetic Pole, if pos- 
sible, and the Continent, if it existed, he sailed from England, 
September, 1839. His two vessels, the Erebus, of 370 tons, 
and the Terror, of 340, were bombing vessels, and so very 
strongly built. Ross arrived at Hobart, Tasmania, in time to 
learn of the discoveries of D’Urville and Wilkes; and “being 
impressed with the feeling that England had ever led the way 
of discovery in the southern as well as the northern region,” 3 
he decided to strike south far to the east, following the 170° 
E. meridian, rather than to the scene of their discoveries. 
He sailed from Hobart, December, 1840, and January 5, 1841, 
he plunged his two vessels into the pack. Four days later he 
emerged into the deep blue waters of the sea that bears his 
name. On January 11, the snow-capped peaks of Mount Sa- 
bine appeared on the horizon; then the Admiralty Range of 


? « 


1 “Voyage of the Discovery,” ii, p. 392 ".. 
definitely disposed of Wilkes Land.” 

3 “With the Aurora ip the Antarctic,” chapter xxiii. 

*Ross, “A Voyage of Discovery and Research in the Southern and 
Antarctic Regions,” 1, p. 117. 


. once and for all we have 


a LITTLE AMERICA 


mountains; and finally the low-set cape he named Cape Adare. 
Thus was the forbidding coast of the continent unveiled to 
him. He struck a (true) southern course, hoping to hedge 
in toward the Magnetic Pole, and on his way sighted a 
second range of mountains (Prince Albert) and then an ac- 
tive volcano (Mount Erebus) with a dead crater, only slight- 
ly lower, nearby (Mount Terror). He pressed on, and a 
discovery of vast importance awaited him. “As we ap- 
proached the land under all-studding sails, we perceived a 
low white line extending from its eastern extreme point as 
far as the eye could discern to the eastward. It presented an 
extraordinary appearance, gradually increasing in height as 
we got nearer to it, and proving at length to be a perpendicu- 
lar cliff, between 150 and 200 feet above the level of the sea, 
perfectly flat on top, and without any fissures or promontories 
on its even seaward face.” 1 

Thus was the Great Ice Barrier, which is now known as 
the Ross Ice Barrier, discovered; and with it the highway by 
means of which two parties of men afoot, and a third by air, 
were later to gain the Pole. Ross made two later magnificent 
voyages to the south, but the value of his discoveries was ob- 
scured somewhat by the public’s rising interest in the North, 
where the quest for the Northwest Passage and the Pole was 
leading to many mad, magnificent things. 

Fifty-three years were to pass before man set foot on the 
Antarctic Continent; and fifty-seven before Borchgrevink, 
apparently in the face of all reason, announced that he would 
inflict upon himself and nine companions the dreadful earthly 
purgatory of wintering at Cape Adare; by this time science 
had taken the place of empire-building in exploration. Storms 
buffeted the little hut; the zoologist, Mg. Nikolai Hanson, 
died of intestinal complications, the first human being to find 
burial on the continent, but, on the whole, the winter was 
not as bad as had been expected. The way was open for the 
Age of Heroic Discovery, which came in with Scott and is 
emblazoned with such imperishable names as his own, and 


those of Shackleton, Mawson, Amundsen and the rest of their 
gallant companies. 


*Ross, “A Voyage of Discover 


5 | : y and Research in the Southern and 
Antarctic Regions,” i, p. 117, 


THE Ross BARRIER. 


A TYPICAL ANTARCTIC TABULAR BERG IN THE Process OF DECAY. 


THE City TAKES GREEN WATER OVER THE WINDWARD RAIL. 


PLAN, PREPARATION AND PROBLEM 45 


Slowly but painfully, facts concerning the continent were 
discovered. Scott, on his first voyage, on the National “Dis- 
covery” Expedition, 1901-1903, pushed far beyond the limits 
of Ross’s discoveries, adding hundreds of miles to the known 
coastline of the continent; he discovered King Edward VII 
Land and the eastern end of the Barrier; with Dr. Edward 
Adrian Wilson, the chief scientist on his later expeditions, 
and Mr. Hartley Ferrar, also of the scientific staff, he under- 
took the first southern sledge journey; he did many things 
first, this gallant Scott, and not the least among them was the 
manner in which he opened the eyes of the world to the pos- 
sibilities of a well-organized, courageously prosecuted scien- 
tific inquiry into the Antarctic. The traditions he founded, 
and in keeping with which he died, were sustained and ex- 
tended by two of his able countrymen, Mawson and Shackle- 
ton. What we know about the Antarctic comes largely from 
them; and if it so happens that the sum total oi this knowl- 
edge, so painfully and splendidly accumulated, serves largely 
to suggest the appalling amount still unknown, it is not that 
they have not done magnificent work; it is only that the 
problem is so vast. 

Prof. David estimated, in 1914, the coastal limits of the 
continent at 14,000 miles, of which about 4,000 were either 
discovered or explored. Hayes is inclined to reduce the former 
figure to approximately 12,000 miles, and advanced the latter 
to approximately 5,000 miles, as a result of subsequent explo- 
ration." Thus, at the bottom of the world there lay, in 1928, 
a continent, greater than the combined areas of Mexico and the 
United States, more than half of whose coasts had never been 
seen, and whose desolate interior had felt only the hurrying 
feet of the parties under, or directed by, Shackleton, Mawson, 
Scott and Amundsen, tracing relatively a few narrow paths 
in its infinite immensities. 

We know many things of this continent. It differs from 
all other land that has come into human consciousness. It 
is the only polar continent. The north polar regions consist 
of an ocean encircled by continents. The south polar regions 
consist of a continent encircled by oceans. Hayes has drawn 
a singular contrast between its isolation and that of other 


1 Hayes, “Antarctica,” p. 308. 


46 LITTLE AMERICA 


great land masses.’ Europe, Asia and America form only 
two land masses which are but slightly separated at their 
nearest points. Europe and Asia are separated from Africa by 
the Suez Canal; and Asia from America by Bering Strait, with 
the Diomede Islands in its stream, so that the water jump from 
Asia to the Island is only 17 miles and from the Island to 
Alaska only 25. Cape Horn, the most southern continental 
point, lies 600 miles from the nearest truly Antarctic land, the 
South Shetlands Islands, and these in turn are separated by 80 
miles from the western coast of Graham Land, which is 
separated from the mainland, having finally been proved by 
Sir Hubert Wilkins not to be a peninsula. The stormiest 
oceans to be found anywhere surround Antarctica. And as if 
these things were not enough, its isolation is made secure 
by the fact it is separated from the rest of the world by oceans 
of abysmal depths, soundings showing depths ranging from 
2,000 to 3,000 fathoms. 

The Antarctic is a continent still in the ice age, similar 
to that which gripped the northern hemisphere perhaps 50,000 
years aco. 2 The greatest ice mass ip the world covers the 
continent, so that only the highest peaks emerge; bare rock 
is so unusual that explorers, finding-.it, could hardly seem more 
delighted if they had come suddenly upon green meadowland. 
The continent is mainly uplifted tablelands of snow and ice, 
from 5,000 to 10,000 feet above sea level, and is traversed in 
places by mountain ranges of extraordinary size and beauty. 
Inland Pe the Polar and South Victoria plateaux—level, vast 
and elevated—which are central areas of the continental ice 
sheet; here the depth of the ice cap appears to range from a 
few feet, where it touches steep mountainous slopes, to from 
1,000 to 5,000 feet on the plateaux. From these areas pour 
moving masses of continental ice, which, propelled by 


CIO pa d. 

_* The deglacierisation of the continent is now held to be a fact. The 
raised beaches discovered by Scott and Shackleton; the finding of moraines 
and erratics high above the general level of the adjacent surface of glacier 
ice. Shackleton found the summit of Mt. Hope strewn with erratics at a 
height fully 2000 feet above the nearest glacial ice, and David and Priests 
ley believe that during the height of glaciation, the ice attained a maximum 
thickness of 4,000 feet in parts of McMurdo Sound from which it is now 
entirely retreated. (“Heart of the Antarctic,” ii, pare 


PLAN, PREPARATION AND PROBLEM 47 


vast pressures in the interior, move down the valleys and 
passes of the encircling mountains in the shape of glaciers and 
ice falls of a size and grandeur found nowhere else in the 
world. 

Toward this continent we turned; and we approached it 
with growing humility; conscious of its majesty and its sul- 
len solitudes, and conscious, too, of the large accomplish- 
ments of the men who had preceded us. What we hoped to 
do, and more we could not do, was to attempt simply to ex- 
tend the knowledge that they had begun to accumulate. 

We selected the Bay of Whales as the best place to base 
because (1) it seemed to offer the likeliest circumstances for 
flying and (2) because it was surrounded by unknown areas. 
To the north and east lay King Edward VII Land, first seen 
by Scott from the deck of the Discovery, first and last 
traversed by Prestrud, 1 and beyond that a wholly unknown 
coastline and interior. Here lay hundreds of thousands of 
square miles of territory utterly unknown to geography, a 
vacuum abhorrent to scientist and cartographer alike. To the 
southeast lay the supposed Carmen Land discovered by Amund-, 
sen op his polar journey,” awaiting the inquiry of precise 
science. Save for the paths of Shackleton, Scott and Amund- 
sen, which at the extreme distance were separated only by 
400 miles and thence converged steadily and narrowly upon the 
Pole, the mysterious plateau was untrodden and unknown. 
What lay beyond it, between the Pole and Weddell Sea, no 
one could say. These avenues for pure discovery offered 
themselves. No less important was the probability of bring- 
ing to bear upon these unknown areas, and upon known ‘areas 
as well, the organized research equipment that modern in- 
vention has produced; in the departments of geology, meteor- 
ology, glaciology, magnetism and allied divisions, pure science 
must benefit. And the advantage lay with us in that we pos- 
sessed three of the most efficient instruments given to the ex- 
plorer; radio, the airplane, with its wonderful speed and in- 
dependence of surface obstructions that vex the foot-traveller, 


"The Japanese Antarctic Expedition, under Lt. Shirase, ascended ope 
of the peaks of Alexandra Range in 1911. The exact route followed, 
however, is unknown. 

?The South Pole, ii, p. 31, 170, 171. 


48 LITTLE AMERICA 


and the aerial mapping camera, which sees everything and for- 
gets nothing. 

We had reason to hope we might accomplish much. But 
as the Larsen forged south, on a peaceful ocean, it was not 
difficult sometimes, to imagine a very different ending. So 
many things might go wrong. So many important things that 
perhaps I had overlooked. So many other things that no one 
could foresee, save the omniscience reserved at the very end 
for the reproachful man, when everything is done and past 
remedy. 


CHAPTER III
THROUGH THE PACK


Tne Larsen docked at Wellington November 5; and the 
end of the journey across the Pacific was to mean many things, 
not the least important of which was the discovery of New 
Zealand’s hospitality to Americans. We soon learned that 
the proximity of this island dominion to the Antarctic was 
not the only thing that recommended it to explorers. We were 
to carry from it the experience of having felt unstinted kind- 
ness, friendliness and cooperation. Had we been Englishmen, 
on an English errand, we could not have been better treated. 
If we, on our side, failed perhaps to show the true measure of 
our gratitude, it was only because we were of necessity so 
intent on our work. Dominating our every mood and action 
was the necessity of making contact with the Larsen at the 
pack. It was a spur that drove us on at top speed. 

As for the Larsen, on her arrival at Wellington, she im- 
mediately began to take on water and supplies: the chasers 1 
that were to accompany her south were already waiting at 
Stewart Island, and Captain Nilsen expected to start within 
a few days. 

Our New Zealand representative, Hon. Harold Living- 
stone Tapley of Dunedin, owner of Tapley Ltd., Shipping 
Agents, sent his manager, Jim Duncan, to meet us to discuss the 
loading of supplies previously sent to Dunedin. Tapiey Ltd. 
was one of the volunteers of the expedition. I have never met 
a finer gentleman than Harold Tapley; and his manager, Jim 
Duncan, typifies the words conscience and efficiency. 

1 Chasers are small, tug-like craft, carrying harpoon guns, which seek 
out the whales and kill them. The Larsen, a factory ship, acts as 
“mother ship” to these chasers and converts the whales into oil on the 


spot. The chasers are very strongly built and with the proper shape and 
curves to contend with the ice. 


49 


50 LITTLE AMERICA 


Rest was a word that soon lost personal meaning. We at 
Wellington took charge of the airplanes and other supplies 
unloaded by the Larsen. We were assisted by our Welling- 
ton representatives, Gardiner, Binnie and Halliburton, who 
were splendid to us. As the days passed, and the City, with 
emptying coal bunkers, dawdled in Pacific doldrums, we 
almost ceased to watch the calendar and began to count the 
hours. 

November 18th saw the Bolling come into Dunedin at 
dawn, her crew tanned and darkened by tropical sun, her own 
sides stained and coated with rust, and with a tale to tell of 
decks that sizzled at noon and fire room temperatures that 
got as high as 120° Fahrenheit. There was much good na- 
tured grousing over the idea of getting seasoned for polar 
cold in what one member of the crew described as “Hells 
anteroom”; but I was delighted to observe that the crew as 
a whole had come through very well, the greenhorns had be- 
come accustomed to their various duties, and Captain 
Brown’s ability was plainly marked in the high morale of his 
men. 

Our plans had meanwhile taken a new turn. Captain 
Brown had been ordered to dump part of his cargo at Dune- 
din, to make room, and proceed north to Wellington as soon 
as possible. There he was to pick up the stuff dropped by 
the Larsen, and return it to the concentration docks at Dune- 
din, where some of it would be taken aboard by the City. 
This meant a saving of at least a day’s time. Just before 
the Bolling got underway, Captain Melville reported that 
the City would arrive in about seven days. She had been be- 
calmed for days, and later driven off her course by storm. 
She was under both steam and sail and deriving but slight as- 
sistance from the Trades. Her arrival, then, would be tardier 
than we had hoped; and as these precious days ebbed, my 
hope of meeting the Larsen grew fainter. 

During the lull between loadings I found that the dogs, 
which had been quartered at Quarantine Island, about six 
miles from Dunedin, were in shocking condition, many of 
them suffering from diarrhea and distemper. The cause of 
it, apparently, was a new diet with which we had experimented, 
and the long journey had aggravated their illness. My pity 


THROUGH, THE PACK 51 


for the beasts was exceeded only by my concern for the future 
of the expedition. Without dogs we were hopelessly handi- 
capped. We could not transport our supplies from the ships 
to our base on the Barrier, much less undertake the extensive 
program of surface geological and glacialogical exploration. 
Dogs provide the one means of transportation effective under 
nearly all conditions of polar travel; and as we proposed to 
pioneer with aircraft, we looked to them especially for as- 
sistance in the event of emergencies. To discover them so 
depleted by sickness, at this late hour, was a dreadful blow. 
It was too late to have new dogs shipped from Labrador. Un- 
less these could be restored to health, the expedition could go 
no farther, at least in 1928. 

In this serious situation we took our troubles to Dr. John 
Malcolm, professor of dietetics at Otago University. He 
worked out a new formula, the ingredients of which were 
beef tallow, meat meal, wheat germ, molasses, and cod liver 
oil. To every one thousand pounds of pemmican were added 
two pints of mixed lemon, which are rich in antiscorbutic 
vitamins. The problem of making a new food was solved 
when the Hudson Brothers, of Dunedin, loaned us the use 
of their chocolate factory at night. A dozen workmen volun- 
teered their services after regular hours, and with their help 
Dr. Malcolm, Mr. Hudson, and Norman Vaughan started 
in the production of twenty-five tons of pemmican biscuits. 
They worked steadily for nearly two weeks, from sunset until 
nearly dawn, and, for all their lack of practice at the art, they 
produced a tremendous pile of pemmican. Enough at least, 
I judged, to see the dogs through to the Barrier, and on the 
trail. Thereafter fresh meat, both seal and whale, could 
be had in plenty to feed them at the base. The next day we 
tried out the formula on the dogs, within a few days they 
began to pick up and by the time we started south most of them 
were beginning to get in good condition. We lost only four 
of our dogs, and it has always seemed a miracle there were 
not more, 

November 24, the Bolling returned from her Wellington 
errand, loaded down with supplies she had taken on there. 
Probably the neatest trick of that week was Captain Brown’s, 
when he finally managed to squeeze the fuselage of the Ford 


52 LITTLE AMERICA 


airplane into the pitifully limited hold of his ship; had the 
crate been half a foot longer, the trick would have been im- 
possible. When it did fall into place, with a sound that might 
have been interpreted as an imprecation, all hands cheered. 
Two days later the City came up the narrow passage to Dune- 
din, and the fo’c’s’le was black with men anxious to have foot 
on earth and asphalt pavement after three months at sea. If 
they had hopes of a long holiday, they must have been disillu- 
sioned when they sighted the docks. At one end was the 
Bolling, from whose open hatches poured ap unslackening 
stream of crates and boxes. Supplies were piled up on the 
docks higher than a man’s head, and this mass was fed con- 
stantly by other streams pouring from warehouses, Over this 
scene presided the indefatigable Brophy directing the flow of 
each tributary and the activities of half a hundred men with | 
astonishing energy and memory of detail. But I could see that 
his nerves were not bearing up under the strain and it worried 
me. 

The City first stopped at Port Chalmers, twenty miles up 
the harbor from Dunedin. We came down from Christ- 
church the next morning and the men from the City met us 
at the train. They were a fine looking group of men. Three 
months ago most of them were the rankest greenhorns, 
but now they not only looked like but were real sailormen. 
Their experience had been far from an easy one. They had 
had a four-hour watch on duty and four hours off, with work 
to do while off watch. It was good to see them in their rough 
clothes and to observe their good humor. They were ready 
for the contest, I could see. 

Precious little sentiment was given the arrival of the City, 
although the incident brought all units of the expedition to- 
gether for the first time in three months. The conferences 
with Captain Melville with respect to the taking on of cargo 
were prefaced by an exchange of derisive remarks from the 
Bolling’s crew ashore and even rougher remarks from the men 
at the taffrail of the City. Each implied the other had en- 
joyed a gentlemanly cruise, which was over, and dirty work 
was at hand. It was indeed. The City went into dry dock im- 
mediately, to have her hull scraped clean of the fronds of sea 
life that such a slow ship picks up on a long journey. The 


THROUGH HE PACK 53 


crew was given liberty for the night, with the strict order 
every man was to report for duty early next morning. There- 
upon our labors began in earnest, and the adjoining neigh- 
borhood echoed to the sounds of unparalleled activity. It was 
ever 50 encouraging to see how every one pitched in; po 
one was exempt and no one shirked; every one, scientist and 
seaman alike, worked with his hands, trundling boxes and 
crates until the back ached and muscles protested. Were 
‘it not for the vagueness of the Larsen’s movements, this 
splendid spirit must have removed my last doubts as to the 
ultimate success of our plans. 

The Larsen had meanwhile sailed south, and was fishing 
north of the pack, which she reported was unusually heavy 
this year. The radiomen maintained a daily schedule with 
her, and the last message from Captain Nilsen reported the 
pack was still too dangerous for passage. There was good 
whaling north of the pack and we prayed it would continue 
so. There was no telling, however, how long the pack would 
hold: from hour to hour my mind played with the thought: 
perhaps she had already started through. Here was a race of 
success against failure. The stakes were large—very large 
indeed. I believe that one really lives more at a time like 
this. 

If any particular memory survives these hurried days, it is 
the memory of the appalling number of things that had to be 
put into the City. How all the things that eventually got aboard 
her were squeezed in is worth a chapter in itself; for with an 
unsuspected necromancy Brophy managed to find a place for 
everything, although the pile of supplies still awaiting a place 
seemed always to grow larger and the space of the City, piti- 
fully small to begin with, appeared to shrink before our 
eyes. The loading schedule had become complicated owing 
to the necessity of separating the two ships. Prudence sug- 
gested that the City be so thoroughly equipped that, if the 
Bolling proved unable to get through the pack, the ice party 
could not only hold out until relief arrived twelve months 
later, but also carry out a substantial amount of the scientific 
program. The outfitting of the City, consequently, took on 
the aspect of setting up a distinct and self-sufficing expedi- 
tion within an expedition. As a result, the cargoes first as- 


54 LITTLE AMERICA 


signed to the vessels had to be redistributed in large part, 
a necessity that taxed the patience and nearly broke the backs 
of all of us before it was done. 

The scene that took place on the docks is not likely to be 
forgotten by most of us. The long arms of cranes rose and 
fell monotonously, winches squealed, chains rattled, and the 
wheels of hand trucks slammed and bumped on deck night 
and day. Sleep was a luxury few gained. In a corner of my 
memory, whence I can draw it forth when I need to smile, is 
a picture of two of the outstanding members of the expedi- 
tion, Professor Gould and Captain McKinley, at grips with 
a kind of work they never did before and are unlikely to do 
again—stevedoring. Sweat staining faces and clothes, they 
struggled with the rest over sacks of coal and boxes of food. 
With them were Haines, the genial meteorologist, in ill-fitting 
dungarees, wobbling in the dust under tiring loads. 

At last the hold was full: there was room for not another 
box below, so we began to load the decks. The crated fuse- 
lage of the Fairchild airplane was swung aboard and lashed 
in place amidships, between the main and foremasts. Food 
boxes and gasoline drums were ranged about it until the 
waist of the ship became so deep with things that before the 
mainsail could be set it must first be reefed. Seventy-five tons 
of coal were stowed away forward; these were for use at the 
base. Then the dogs, in their clumsy boxed kennels, were 
hoisted to the poop deck, and their crates ranged in rows; 
when that space was filled, the remaining dogs found haven 
on the top of my deck cabin and on the roof of the airplane 
crate. Here it was believed they would be out of reach of 
water, which they cannot abide; and the yelps, the growls and 
squalling with which they announced this change of residence 
were wonderful to hear. It was a sound we were to know well, 
for it did not leave our ears for nearly a year and a half. 

As the weights of supplies in her mounted, the City settled 
gradually, and before the loading was finished water showed 
above the Plimsol line. This, with the fact that an immoder- 
ately large part of her load was above decks, gave rise to 
some uneasiness. In fact, the day before we put to sea, an 
old sailing man, who had been watching operations with a 
disapproving eye, came up and said: “You're taking ap aw- 


THROUGH THE PACK 55 


ful chance with that ship. She'll ship green water every roll. 
You don’t know what storms are until you get into the 
‘Sixties.’ I’ve been there and I know.” I assured him we 
knew what we were doing, but confess that the incident sug- 
gested in an unpleasant manner the unhappy wedding guest 
impaled on the glance of the Ancient Mariner. 

During this period the Otago Harbour Board of Dunedin 
was extremely helpful and generous. It docked our vessels, 
gave us port facilities and the use of warehouses, and per- 
formed innumberable courtesies, for which I was more than 
grateful. 

The late afternoon of December I saw the City loaded and 
ready to put to sea. But rather than start out half-cocked, we 
decided to postpone departure until the following morning. 
The delay gave Brophy a much-needed opportunity to check 
and cross-check the cargo. The night was spent in stock- 
taking. December 2nd at six o’clock in the morning, the order 
was given to start. The tug that was to tow us to sea threw 
us a line, and the City followed, with the Bolling astern. 
Even at this early hour many of the new friends we had made 
in New Zealand were on hand; it was no longer possible to 
believe we were strangers departing from a foreign land. We 
slipped down the narrow channel that leads from Dunedin to 
the sea; and off Tairoa Head the tug cast us loose. Captain 
Brown threw us a quarter-inch steel hawser, which we took on 
our anchor winch with a number of turns and then anchored 
to the foremast. The line ran out about a quarter of a mile 
and then, as the slack disappeared, a slight shock ran over the 
massive frame of the City, and she slowly gathered headway. 
So, in this lame, but necessary manner, we began our race to 
the Larsen. 

My diary that night carried the following entry: 


En route to Bay of Whales 
December 2, 1928 


I think we may breathe more easily now. The last piece 
of loose cargo has been securely lashed, and it will take a pretty 
strong sea to do us much damage. We were lucky to have 
such a perfect day. Had we run into bad weather earlier we 
might have lost half the dogs and supplies on deck. There is 


56 LITTLE AMERICA 


the barest hint of a swell running, otherwise sea and sky are 
all we could ask for. With all sails set and under steam, we 
are making about eight knots under the Bolling’s tow. If we 
can keep this up, we ought to reach the northern edge of the 
pack within seven or eight days. 

I am thankful the Larsen is still outside. We may still 
reach her. I have vainly tried to induce Captain Nilsen to set 
an approximate date for his dash through the pack, even 
though I knew well he could not do this. Though this un- 
certainty is trying, the contest is more interesting. 

I have just made a trip of survey about the ship. There 
are fifty-four men aboard, making eighty-three men on the 
expedition all told. From the amount of congestion, one 
might imagine there were ten times that number. Below 
decks, everything is in great confusion. Every bunk is piled 
high with equipment, which has overflowed to the floor. There 
is scarcely a place where one can set foot on deck. Supplies 
of all descriptions so fill the deck that to get from fore to aft 
it is either necessary to do a perilous balancing act on the rail 
or else risk one’s neck in an alpine assault over peaks and 
precipices of dog crates and food boxes. How any of us 
will find room to sleep tonight is beyond me. Dean Smith, 
who is six feet, four inches tall, and carries a frame to 
match, looked in at the five foot ten bunk in which he is ex- 
pected to find haven, and was moved to comment in an em- 
phatic way on the spirit that moves men to explore. I dare 
say most of the others feel the same way at this moment. 
It will be days before we get our things stowed away. Van der 
Veer 1 and Rucker ? are buried under a mass of photographic 
gear, and a hasty glance at Hanson’s quarters suggests he 
has taken all the radio equipment in the world to the Antarc- 
tic. My own quarters, astern, aft of the smokestack, do not 
bear comparison : trunks, crated clothing and instruments age 
strewn about as if discarded by a hurricane. And if this were 
not enough, the chaos is exaggerated by the mixed harmony of 
the dogs overhead and the high pitched overtones from the 
radio machinery next door. The dogs have howled all day 

‘Willard Van der Veer, photographer assigned to the expedition by 


Paramount News. He was also on the North Pole Expedition. 
° Joseph Rucker, also of Paramount News, 


THROUGH THE PACK 57 


long, with an unearthly disharmony all their own, and the radio 
will probably keep at it all night. What few wits as are left 
to us are rapidly disappearing. 

Still, things are not at all bad. Good old George Ten- 
papi! gave us an excellent dinner, everyone is in fine spirits, 
and there is a great deal of amusing joking about our lot. We 
all eat together in the fo’c’s’le, officers and men alike. I have 
decided to permit no social or official distinctions to be drawn 
during the life of the expedition. The naming of officers will 
be governed more according to the placing of responsibility 
and authority than the following of formal service customs 
with the “aye, aye, Sir” and the complete social segregation of 
the officers and men. Ina sense there are no officers and men. 
Some merely hold responsibility—that is the only difference. 
It will be an interesting experiment, whatever comes of it. 

We have been under sail for nearly twelve hours. At six 
o'clock this evening, Mulroy started his engines. It was a 
wonderful sight, earlier in the day, to see the greenhorns in 
the rigging setting sail. Most of them stepped about rather 
timidly, but did what they were told, making up in willingness 
what they lacked in skill. First mate Strom will have them 
tough as shellbacks in another week. The men who have made 
the voyage from the States do their job like old sailormen. 

I was rather surprised when Captain Melville got the 
men together this morning and nominated the starboard and 
port watches. This means that all hands, with the exception 
of the cook, radiomen and several other specialists, will have 
four hours on duty and four hours off. There being much 
work to be done, besides deck duty, this arrangement must 
work real hardship; it will be difficult for them to get enough 
sleep. However, we shall see how it works out. It is my per- 
sonal opinion that a watch in three would be better. We have 
enough extra hands to do it. I shall suggest it to the Captain 
tomorrow, anyway. 


The next two days found us pushing southward with re- 
freshing speed. Monday, the wind hauled around to the north 
and gave us such a boost that we were soon treading on the 
Bolling’s stern, with the tow line curved and slack. We were 


* Also cook on the North Pole Expedition. 


58 LITTLE AMERICA 


sufficiently emboldened to cast off the tow and make our way 
alone, under sail and steam. We averaged nine knots—luck 
was with us. Tuesday, the wind veered to the south, and the 
cold breath of the ice fields was on it. The wolf dogs seemed 
to sense the ice for their weird howling became almost con- 
tinuous. We crawled back to the Bolling’s tow, reefed sail 
and made ready for a storm that the lowering barometer 
prophecied. It was a trying day for the amateur sailors. The 
sea was quite rough, the ship rolled heavily and yardarms 
were precarious places when hands were freezing and sails were 
icy and cranky. Bubier, the aviation mechanic, who had never 
seen a ratline before, much less handled one, came down from 
a lofty perch with hands blue and teeth chattering from cold. 
“Give me flying every time,” he said. Later in the day, the 
wind changed again to southwest, and we hoisted the spanker 
and jib sail. 

Slowly we accustomed ourselves to the routine, and as the 
congestion below was gradually relieved by the sorting out of 
gear the ship became more habitable. There was still a chill 
in the air, but Wednesday, the 5th, brought continuing gentle 
winds and a smoking blue sky. With a few exceptions, all 
hands were in fine spirits. Among these exceptions were seasick 
seamen of whom we had an abnormal casualty list. Another 
was Igloo, who, to my astonishment, developed a real inferior- 
ity complex. Igloo is the companion of my ventures, a fox 
terrier of doubtful pedigree but unquestioned integrity. 
Neither modesty nor humility, I regret to say, is in his atti- 
tude, and until this trip I fancied neither man nor beast could 
discompose him. He met his superiors, however, in the Eskimo 
dogs, and in admitting to himself their superiority, his spirit 
underwent an extraordinary change. He hardly dared venture 
out on deck alone. His mere appearance brought from the 
beasts a fearful medley of challenges and imprecations; they 
hurled themselves at the doors of their crates, and those 
chained on the deck dashed out at him with fangs bared and a 
tremendous rattling of chains as he streaked past. Nights, 
when they began their melancholy singing, which can unseat 
the composure of an imaginative man, he shivered behind a 
box in my cabin. Not until the last sound had faded away, 
as mysteriously as it began, dared he come forth again, and 


THROUGH THE PACK 59 


then only in the lee of a friendly human figure. Poor Igloo, 
I did not blame him. Those primitive dogs, who kill for the 
sheer lust of killing, would assassinate him on the spot, as 
he was shrewd enough to realize. It was he, indeed, who 
found adventure on the way south. 

Thursday, the 6th, the weather was still favorable, although 
the sea was rougher and rising steadily. There was the hint of 
a storm in the air. The sky was a deep gray, and the sun 
shone through it with paling strength. The wind was abaft 
the beam all day, so that we made at times as much as ten 
knots, a speed I never dared hope for. But this, in turn, 
proved a mixed blessing. Even under favorable conditions, 
keeping a taut line on a ship in sail and in tow is one of the 
most trying tasks ever wished on a green crew; in the face 
of the seas we encountered that day and the next the task 
approached physical punishment. As the City rose and fell under 
the action of the waves, the line would tighten and then pay 
off; our progress became a succession of arching rises and 
jabbing thrusts, not at all pleasant. The line hummed as it 
stiffened suddenly, and I began to wonder when another shock 
would break it. We had one nasty moment when the wheel 
turned balky, and spun around, with a swiftness and power 
that knocked Demas and Bursey from their feet. Before she 
could be checked, the City swung off to port, and as the strain 
increased the Bolling was slowed up and the City came along- 
side at a high rate of speed. Under the lash of Strom’s orders, 
men scuttled up the rigging, sails were hastily taken in and 
what might have been a serious crash was avoided at the last 
moment. It was a very anxious time. 

Toward evening, the wind freshened almost to gale force, 
the barometer dropped slightly and all indications pointed to 
dirty weather. It came, with the blustery strength for which 
this region is famous, and my diary reports: 


En Route to Bay of Whales 
Aboard City of New York 
December 8, 1928 

Night 


Owing to the bad weather that struck us yesterday, I 
made no entries in my log. Thursday night the ship pitched 


60 LITTLE AMERICA 


so, we got little sleep. About five o’clock, the ship was mak- 
ing very heavy weather of it. Seas were breaking over the 
taffrail, the wind velocity approached fifty miles per hour, 
and the glass dropped sharply. Matters were decidedly serious. 
My first fears were for the cargo on deck and the dogs. There 
was danger some of the heavy, loose stuff on the deck might 
be knocked about by boarding seas, perhaps smashing the 
skylights, hatchways and bulwarks. AP hands were called out 
to make fast dog crates and all gear on deck with double lash- 
ings. Fortunately, the gale blew us along the line of our 
course. We managed to keep the City going with wind and 
waves—had we broached into the trough of a sea our decks 
must have been swept as clean as a pantry shelf. 

The men at the wheel had the worst time. The wheel is 
out in the open on the after deck, and, lacking steam power, is 
very difficult to control. For this reason, we had two men 
on duty all the time, but even against their combined strength 
it spun on several occasions out of control. On the morning 
watch, McKinley was bowled over by one such revolution, fall- 
ing with such force that he was knocked out. He came to in 
a moment, and save for a severe bruising was unhurt. 

From time to time the ship rolled her sides under, but not 
enough green water came aboard to cause damage. It was 
hazardous work, however, moving about the deck in the 
confusion of the cargo, for there was always the thought 
that the crate or box that offered lee might in a moment be 
torn loose from its fastenings and become a Juggernaut. Be- 
lieving the towline must presently give way, I went forward 
to She fo’c’s’le where I had an opportunity to see the play 
between ship and storm. A quarter of a mile away the Bol- 
ling labored heavily in water that rose high enough to hide 
her from sight, and she seemed to be rolling her sides under 
with every other roll. The bowsprit of the City pointed her 
out like an entreating finger. Now it rose dizzily to the 
horizon, trembled a moment at the top of flight, then plunged 
dizzily to the sea, to meet a rush of green water gushing 
underneath. Yardarms creaked and groaned overhead, and 
at times it seemed the outer reaches of the lower yardarms 
were flicking the tops of the waves at the end of a long roll. 
The towline tightened and slackened in rapid succession, and 


THROUGH) THE PACK 61 


I knew then that it would be only a question of time before 
it broke or the bridle supporting it on the Bolling gave way. 

I was writing out orders to radio to the Bolling to cast 
loose the tow line when I saw the port line on the bridle snap. 
Then the City rose on a wave and on the Bolling I saw some- 
one race aft, seize a hatchet and cut loose the other line. Al- 
most at the same moment the Bolling swerved to starboard, 
warning us with six toots on the whistle of her intent—a sig- 
nal we had agreed upon in the event of such an emergency. 
Smith, helmsman on the City, on hearing the blasts, put rudder 
hard left, and the City bore away, dragging the heavy steel 
hawser across her bows. Had Smith been less quick-witted 
a collision might have followed. 

As it was, we did not get clear unscotched. In the ex- 
citement a seaman loosed the main lower topsail sheets, and 
as the wet sail ran down it bellied out in the storm; before 
anxious hands could save it there was a series of pistol-like 
reports, and the sail was in shreds. This fellow’s mistake 
was nothing more criminal than lack of experience, but from 
the lacing he got from the mate of the watch he is not likely 
to repeat the mistake. 

However, we reduced sail and made our way mostly 
under steam. The Bolling by now was a mile or two to star- 
board, no doubt alarmed a3 to our condition. Hege the radio 
proved invaluable. By means of the wireless telephone which 
Hanson rigged up on both ships, it is possible to maintain 
excellent communication between the two ships. I lost no time 
in assuring Captain Brown the City was undamaged, and was 
in turn relieved to hear his voice say that, except for the broken 
line, the Bolling was also uninjured. 

We then fell to the job of bringing home the towline, 
and what a miserable job that was. The City had no steam 
winch on the fo’c’s’le, her hand anchor winch was as old as the 
City, and its effectiveness had not improved with age. For 
two hours Strom and his crew, drenched with spray, pumped 
up and down, encouraging themselves with stirring chanties. 
At length we recovered every inch of it, full thirty fathoms 
in all, but there is scarcely a back aboard ship that can push 
itself erect. 

A trip around the ship showed that everything was in 


b LITTLE AMERICA 


place, although a few crates had been dislodged by the seas 
which still fell with smothering force upon the decks. Ten- 
nant’s galley ran with a foot of water, in which slops and 
food were commingled on the deck in an unsavory mess. In 
spite of these difficulties, he managed to keep his fire going . 
and served an excellent hot meal of soup, boiled beef, potatoes, 
stewed tomatoes and pudding. The dogs took the storm in an 
evil mood. Their cries never ceased, and with the wind, took 
on a strange and mournful note, whether because of distress 
or fear I cannot say. Heaven knows, they are rarely still, but 
now they howl all day, in the most dismal chorus, with oc- 
casional ferocious fighting sounds. Several fell sick, nearly all 
had their kennels flooded by the higher seas, but otherwise 
came to no harm. Because they hate the touch of dampness, 
those which can are standing weakly in their crates, fighting 
to keep footing against the pitch of the ship. 

It appeared, at first, we were in for a spell of bad weather. 
The whalers farther south reported similar heavy storms, and 
Haines, our meteorologist, thought the storm might become 
more intense the next day, at least over short periods. Never- 
theless, as the day wore on the glass rose, although the force 
of the seas did not abate and the sky was unpromising. 

Then, about seven o’clock, the wind lessened in intensity 
and blew slightly to the west; an hour later the rim of the sun 
showed through a cloud, and the storm blew itself out. It 
was succeeded, however, by a period of very thick weather, 
which caused us to debate for a time the advisability of haul- 
ing to, lest we collide with an iceberg, the presence of which 
was suggested by rapidly chilling air. Toward eight o’clock, 
the sky cleared marvellously fast and we caught sight of the 
sun in a gorgeous sunset panorama. It came to me with 
strong force how we appreciate things by contrast. This in- 
spiringly beautiful sunset, falling tranquilly upon a hushed 
sea after such a storm, gave one the impression of entering 
an entirely different world. 
| Saturday dawned cold and clear, with a moderate wind 
sh 3 quarter. At five o’clock this morning, we gave our line 
o” again, and were underway by seven, making 
pee y tau 15 She happier for the ending of yester- 

: on our position was Lat. 62° 10’ S., Long. 


THROUGH THE PACK 63 


174° 27" E. We were then 997 miles south oi Tairoa Head. 

Tonight it is so clear that I can still write without the 
aid of lantern, although it is nearly ten o’clock. Als well 
that ends well. The Larsen is still outside the pack! 


I was to learn, the following day, Sunday, that I spoke 
too soon. For, as we drew nearer the south magnetic Pole, 
which was to the southwestward well under 1,000 miles from 
us, the compasses became erratic; there was a large difference 
between the standard compass and the steering compass, and 
the directive force had become so slight we scarcely dared to 
trust the former. Facing, as we did, the necessity of meeting 
the Larsen which was on the move, the problem of navigation 
was a difficult one, especially as we spent the last half of 
Saturday night and most of Sunday poking through thick 
fog. It shut down so thickly that the Bolling was_obscured, 
and opportunities to get a line on the sun to locate our position 
were few and far between. The Larsen for the same reason 
did not know her exact position. From my point of view, 
this was one of the most ticklish moments of the trip. The 
Larsen was only about 200 miles south of us; and it was im- 
perative we pick her up without loss of time. 

Early Sunday morning we sighted the first sentinel of 
the Antarctic—a lone tabular iceberg. It was presently suc- 
ceeded by others, in increasing quantities, until at last they 
formed an endless procession, stretching as far as the eye 
could see. They made a striking scene in the half-mist, and 
the mind suggested fantastic shapes bearing relationship to 
sculptured forms and faces. We could spare little time for 
day-dreaming just then, though, for the barometer started 
to drop with bewildering speed, and the sea developed a long, 
sustained roll. We turned east, to avoid an isolated section 
of the flat pack ice dead ahead and made some distance in 
this direction before turning west. We thus slipped in behind 
the smaller pack and the larger pack lay somewhere due south 
over the horizon. Our race against time was almost run. 

Monday, the toy, found us still making our way alongside 
rafted groups of icebergs, most of them of the long flat- 
topped types peculiar to Antarctic regions. In the space of a 
few hours we passed no less than fifty of them, each followed 


64 LITTLE AMERICA 


by the inevitable tail of brash ice. On those rare moments 
when the sun broke through and shone upon them, we had 
glimpses of enchanting beauty. The light fell softly in the 
smoking haze, until the sides of the bergs glittered like marbled 
cliffs, and the blue shadows in the ice glowed as with an in- 
ternal radiance. In the nearer bergs we could observe the 
darker shadowed horizontal lines that indicated successive 
stratification. In the caves worn at the water line we could 
hear the booming of the sea, and as they struck the waves 
hurled spray higher, I judged, than our mast. Occasionally 
we sighted a true derelict—a berg undermined by the action 
of the sea until it had overturned, and now, with its eroded 
and hollowed basement in the air, was moving with wind and 
currents to complete annihilation in warmer waters. 

The weather was heart-breaking—moments of glorious 
sunshine, succeeded by snow flurries, wretched squalls and 
fog. Nevertheless the Captain did manage to take some ac- 
curate sights, and we were so encouraged that at noon we 
laid a line that went through Scott Island, in the belief that, 
if our position was correct, we might be able to solve the 
mystery of this little outcropping of land. Lieutenant Colbeck, 
of Scott’s first expedition had first sighted this “loneliest of 
islands” and, although whaling ships were constantly in ad- 
joining waters, they had not sighted it and doubted its ex- 
istence The surprise of every one aboard was no greater 
than my own when, about five o’clock, the lookout reported 
land ahead. It was Scott Island, and we passed it abeam about 
seven o’clock.? 

What a God-forsaken place it is. Simply two great hunks 
of basaltic rock emerging in misshapen outline from a waste 
of sea. One was much larger than the other. It rose, almost 
perpendicularly, from the sea, and its top was capped with 
snow. Someone remarked upon its resemblance to an ele- 
phant’s head, an appearance it did assume from the west. 
Flecks of brown moss were visible near the top of the peak. 
The sky overhead was noisy and dark with the flight of thou- 
sands of birds, mostly petrels, who nested on its bleak sides. 
This rock must be at least 200 feet high. The other rock was 
probably sixty feet shorter in height, but ran about a quarter 

* Position of the island is Long. 179° 51’ 30” W., Lat. 67° 25" S. 


THROUGH THE PACK 65 


mile in a north and south direction. To the south an icefoot 
descended to the sea. The excitement over this discovery was 
so great that it was all we could do to prevent the scientists 
from going overboard to make their first studies of glaciology 
and bird life. 

Leaving this fascinating island behind, we struck due 
south. A confused, vaguely illuminated grayness in the sky 
indicated the pack was not far off. Soon the lookout re- 
ported it dead ahead, and not long afterwards it could be seen 
from the deck, a low rafted rampart stretching east and west 
as far as the eye could see. Reluctant to force the Bolling into 
it, we sought a way around it and saw, to the eastward, a lane 
of fairly open water. Eight o’clock that night we were only 
about forty miles from the Larsen, but never seemed as far 
away. The pack ranged all about us, snow flurries from the 
west struck us continuously, and in the bad visibility we were 
repeatedly menaced by ice bergs, weighing hundreds of thou- 
sands of tons, that lay in our path. It was an eerie experience 
to see these floating dreadnaughts, propelled by unknown sub- 
marine currents, move forward in the face of a headwind, 
at varying gaits of speed. 

All that night and the morning of the next day (it was 
still December 10—having crossed the 180th meridian we lost 
a day) we dodged shifting pack ice and bergs, working to the 
east in search of open water. Weather continued thick and 
snowy, with poor visibility. During one of these thick spells, 
the Bolling stopped quickly to avoid a berg, her whistle sud- 
denly failed and we nearly rammed her. We went full speed 
astern and, of course, had just gathered momentum when the 
Bolling went ahead again. The shock tore the cable loose 
from the City. It was our good luck, however, to be free 
from the task of hauling it up again, so we stood by while 
the poor devils on the Bolling went at it. Then a peculiar 
accident occurred. They had all but a few fathoms on the drum 
when I noticed a scurry of men about the winch. The winch 
began to scream shrilly, I saw the line begin to pay out and 
flip wildly and serpentinely about the deck and then, with a 
last scream and a shower of sparks as it struck the metal 
deck, it whipped overboard. At the same time two men, who I 
later learned were McGuinness and Kessler, dropped to their 


66 LITTLE AMERICA 


knees, barely escaping being cut down in the final contortions 
of the hawser. It meant the loss of the cable and therefore 
the end of the towing, but I did not sorrow for that when I 
learned no one was injured. It was difficult to believe there 
were no casualties for only a moment before half the crew 
had been gathered about the winch. The compasses now went 
completely “haywire.” There was one hundred degrees dif- 
ference between the standard compass and the steering com- 
pass. Because of thick weather neither our ships, nor the 
Larsen, knew our exact position. We were heading for a ship 
of unknown position with our own position doubtful and 
compasses confused. 

In this situation our radio compasses proved invaluable. 
By means of a series of bearings we headed the ship in the 
direction of the wireless waves coming from the Larsen and 
thus bore steadily toward her. It was rather a problem, how- 
ever, trying to keep on that elusive wave and dodge moving 
masses of ice at the same time. 

Once we were caught between the main pack and an enorm- 
ous field of floating ice, with cakes in it half a mile long, dis- 
torted by pressure—a rather fearsome sight, but with a bit 
of jockeying we avoided dangerous ice. Sverre Strom and 
Johanssen, Norwegian ice pilots who had come all the way 
from Norway in the City, spent hours in the rigging keeping 
us out of bad pack. We were greatly relieved when Strom 
called down from the lookout’s barrel on the masthead that 
they had sighted the Larsen on the other side of an ice field. 
Captain Melville and I studied the situation, and decided that, 
by making Eastings, we could get into the sheltered bay of 
ice in which she lay. Here was a perfect ice-locked harbor 
in the middle of the pack, with upended ice offering a splendid 
lee. The ice pilots guided us safely around and we stopped 
our engines a short distance from the whaler. For the mo- 
ment, at least, our larger problems were solved, and you may 
be sure we were in a happy state of mind. 

However, we found no leisure, for there now faced us 
the task of shifting 100 tons of coal in sacks from the Bolling 
to the City, to replenish the bunkers. Although a very heavy 
swell was running, we brought the Bolling alongside, smash- 
ing several davits on the Bolling and tearing off a strip of 


THROUGH THE PACK 67 


woodwork from the poop deck of the City. We had barely 
started shifting coal when the wind stiffened and drifted us to 
leeward, and as the sea rose we could see the iron plates of the 
Bolling bend and give as she banged against the tougher wooden 
sides of the City. Meanwhile the barometer plunged to 28.80, 
which at home would herald the coming of another Florida 
hurricane. Haines, watching its fall with excited eyes, was 
moved to say: “I never saw a barometer so low.” This posi- 
tion was altogether too precarious, so we cast off, and the 
vessels separated. About four o’clock in the afternoon Cap- 
tain Nilsen informed me by radio that he expected to attempt 
to force the pack that night or early the following morning. 
We seemed caught between the devil and the deep blue sea. 
But needing that coal, we decided to take a long risk in get- 
ting it aboard. Making our way to the lee of the pack, we 
found long, slow swells but no rough water. I gave the order 
to tie up again, and after maneuvering for two hours, Brown 
with great skill brought the Bolling alongside the New York, 
with only minor damage. At eleven o’clock, the City was 
taking on coal, all hands were on deck and the work progressed 
in the golden haze of the midnight sun. The wind was from 
the south, a good omen, for it would help to break up the 
pack. By eleven o’clock the next day, Tuesday the eleventh, 
the last sack of coal was aboard, ninety tons having been trans- 
ferred in twelve hours. The weather, fortunately, continued 
good; and the storm the barometer had suggested had failed, 
as often before, to materialize. It was a long time before 
Haines and Harrison got over their amazement at these ter- 
rific drops of the barometer that did not bring hurricanes. 
This was one of the queer things about this new world we 
were entering. 

The Bolling immediately cast off and made for Dunedin. 
There was no use risking her presence in the dangerous ice. 
Besides, she must make haste if she were to accomplish two 
more trips that season. We saw her last about noon, her 
smoke a gray plume in the northern horizon. The men 
aboard her had done their job well, and Captain Brown 
proved himself to be a master of skill and courage. 

We on the City took advantage of the lull to turn in for 
much needed sleep; during the last three days few of us had 


68 LITTLE AMERICA 


had adequate rest, and the continued solidarity of the pack 
forced the Larsen to delay departure for another twenty-four 
hours at least. 

As a matter of fact, we remained in the bay until the 
midnight watch, December 15. The delay gave us all a 
chance to recuperate, and there was enough excitement to 
keep us on our toes. On the morning of Wednesday, the 12th, 
we were rather surprised to note that Hanson had been un- 
able to “raise” the Bolling on the regular radio schedule, and 
as minutes went by without word from her we became alarmed. 
Two possibilities suggested themselves—that the Bolling, run- 
ning fast in thick weather, had struck an ice berg, or the 
operator was asleep, a thing Hanson held to be unlikely. Ten 
o’clock came, still no word: most of us by then were gathered 
in the radio room, our eyes fixed on the glowing tubes and 
restless pointers. What puzzled us beyond measure was our 
failure to hear the emergency set: it had been agreed that in 
case of inability to keep the regular schedule, the emergency 
signal was to be sent every fifteen minutes. I hesitate even 
now to describe my feelings during the next hour: I can only 
say that when Hanson burst into my cabin at noon, with the 
news he had just heard the Bolling and knew it was she be- 
cause he recognized Grenlie’s peculiar way of sending, I was 
probably the happiest man in the world. The operator, we 
learned, was so fatigued as a result of helping with the un- 
loading that he had slept through his watch. 

While waiting we saw one of the chasers attached to the 
Larsen chase a whale nearby. The gunner dispatched it with 
two very neat shots from the harpoon gun. When the first 
shot went home, the crew of the tiny gunboat made the line 
fast to a bow winch, then the gunner closed in for the death 
blow. A puff of smoke—a black line snaking out—and an- 
other hit was scored. On this the huge blue whale, which 
seemed at least eighty feet long, hurled its bulk out of water 
with a resounding splash and expired. Later on, about twen- 
ty of us went over to the Larsen in a small boat, to pay a social 
call on Captain Nilsen and his crew. We saw them take a 
ninety-ton whale aboard, drawing it up through the heart- 
shaped funnel in the nose and laying it, like a mountainous mass 
of blubbery jelly, on the forward deck, Ninety tons—180,000 


THROUGH THE PACK 69 


Ibs. Think of it! This mighty mammal would dwarf the 
mightiest pre-historic monsters. Expert cutters went at it, 
and within an hour the whale was becoming crude oil. It was 
not a pleasant sight. I had the feeling these splendid crea- 
tures deserved a better fate. Nor was it a thing sensitive 
nostrils would willingly endure. A whaling ship, even when 
scoured clean, is not suggestive of attar of roses; but in the 
midst of whaling operations it leaves, as far as smells go, 
very, very much to be desired. 

Weather meanwhile continued calm, but the failure of the 
pack to break was discouraging. Thursday, the 13th, we had 
word that the Ross, for all her powerful engines, was stuck 
fast in the pack to the south of us, and as long as she was 
imprisoned, the Larsen was reluctant to entrust herself to the 
mercy of the pack. It was apparent then that the pack was 
abnormally heavy for this time of the year, a belief supported 
by a confidential message I received from the master of the 
whaler Nilsen-Alonzo, Captain H. Andresen, on Friday. He 
reported a fairly difficult passage through the pack, finding 
“very hard ice” ip many places. “If you can keep to open 
tracks,’ he said, “you should have no difficulty in getting 
through, otherwise I would advise a week’s delay, as the ice 
is slackening day by day.” 

During these three days we had drifted northeast with 
the pack to Lat. 67° 48’ 5. Long. 177° 59’ W., crossing the 
meridian 180° and so getting into West Longitude. It was 
calm, with a smooth sea and sunny, and we made the most of 
it in checking the compasses. In swinging ship, we found 
the standard compass virtually useless, but, oddly enough the 
steering compass moved around fairly well, although with 
considerable deviation, no doubt from the influence of the 
local magnetism of the metal aboard ship. We used the sun 
compass, besides taking azimuths in the regular way, to get 
the error. They checked fairly well, but not quite as ac- 
curately as I had wished. 


Noon, Saturday 
December 15, 1928 
En route to Bay of Whales 


We have been in the pack since the first of the mid-night 


70 LITTLE AMERICA 


watch—starting, significantly, on the date of Amundsen’s ar- 
rival at the Pole, sixteen years ago. It isa relief to be moving, 
but the situation is not without peril. The Larsen has us in 
tow opa 3% inch single wire cable, and we slide along behind 
like a cockleshell in a narrow lane of shattered ice. It is 
tricky work keeping in line. A slight deviation to right or left 
might bring us up hard against a heavy floe, in which case 
something would have to give. The City, with her modest 
displacement of 500 tons, is just a chip in contrast with the 
Larsen, with her 8,000 horsepower and 17,000 tons, and as we 
follow behind her we have the impression of being drawn by an 
irresistible force. When a collision occurs with a thick solid 
ice floe, one of three things must give: the ice; the bow of 
our ship; or her sides. Thus far the City has smashed the 
ice with incredible strength. Were the Larsen to hit an ice 
mass, at the same speed, she must soon tear a hole in her bow. 
The Larsen goes at it more shrewdly. She eases up to a 
floe, pressing her bow gently against the ice and then surges 
forward at full speed. She thus avoids a direct smash, and, 
instead of penetrating at a blow she forces her way per- 
‚ suasively through. The pack has a tendency to surge back 
after the passage of the cleaving hull of the Larsen, and we 
have the constant feeling that it may come between us alto- 
gether. Behind us, the passage has closed down into a slim 
ribbon of black water, the edges of which now lip so closely 
together it is difficult to believe we got through it. Through 
this passage, the tough little chasers are strung out a half 
mile behind gingerly picking their way under their own power. 
Responsibility for keeping us out of trouble rests with 
the mate of the watch, who must be on the job every minute. 
We have a watch on She fo’c’s’le head, with telephonic com- 
munication to the after deck, and a man standing by the 
engine room telegraph, Owing to the fact the deckhouse 
blocks his vision, the helmsman cannot see ahead. But with 
two pairs of eyes serving him (we have a second man in the 
peshchu p to get along. It is all very irying, 
c ‚E when the Larsen stubs her po3e suddenly op a 
big floe, it is hard to keep the City from plowing into her 

stern. This old ship has an inertia all her own. 
G cannot begin to express my debt to Captain Nilsen. 


THROUGH THE PACK 71 


He trusts us not to ram the Larsen and we will not fail him. 
With all the alertness of which we are capable we will be on 
the job. 

The situation is encouraging. Here we are at the end 
of the Larsen’s line, making excellent time, expending little coal 
and drawing near our base. The presence of our escort is 
secret. Owen, at Captain Nilsen’s request, has not mentioned 
the fact in his dispatches. 


Night, 
Same Day. 


The pack is still heavy to the south, but our progress has 
been such as to encourage the prediction we shall reach the 
Bay of Whales perhaps as early as the 26th, and probably not 
later than the end of the month. This ought to give sufficient 
time before winter sets in, in which to accomplish the unload- 
ing. 

The weather continues clear, calm and warm, and the 
sky is a light blue which fades out into gray toward the horizon. 
It is so warm many of the men are stripped down to their 
undershirts. Actually, the temperature is nearly freezing. 
The noon sun, however, made heavy clothes seem very un- 
comfortable. 

We sighted a number of seals today, big, bloated looking, 
lazy fellows, who waked at the noise of our passage, rolled a 
sleepy eye at us and then, as if dismissing the incident as 
unimportant, fell into slumber again. From time to time snowy 
petrels wheeled overhead, hoping to pick up scraps of food, 
and once I saw an albatross in soaring flight. 

The pack is a fascinating place. Those who imagine it 
to be a bleak waste of ice have no conception of the beauty 
to be found in polar regions. Midnight is a time of splendor, 
for then the glory in the heavens descends upon the fields of 
ice and sky and circumambient air, and they seem to burn and 
glow with colors in which green, rose, gold, red and blue com- 
mingle in delicate tones. Past the up-ended, pressure-ridden 
masses of ice the low hung sun, wheeling about the horizon, 
casts long lilac shadows; and the more massive, towering ice 
forms take op the aspect of architectural magnificence, whose 


72 LITTLE AMERICA 


portals, turrets, rounded domes and cornices (of a cosmic 
disorder no hand could hope to imitate) diffuse a pale colora- 
tion. 

There is serenity here, disturbed only by the sound 
of the ice hissing alongside the ship, and the faint grating 
as the shattered fragments of the pack, lifted by swell and our 
movement, press their faces together. The sound is not un- 
like that which one hears in a forest when a slight wind stirs. 

Ahead, past the Larsen, it is possible to see a streak of dark 
_ water reaching south. The southern horizon i3 mottled, sug- 

gestive of an ice-filled but passable sea. 
| We shall get through. We are truly fortunate. 


Monday 
December 17, 1928 


In looking over yesterday’s entry, I discovered that I 
neglected to say we entered the pack at Long. 178° E. It 
appears this meridian offers the best passage through the pack. 
Our noon position was Long. 179° 55’ E., Lat. 69° 7’ S. 

Our present position, however, is not very promising. We 
have encountered a great deal af very thick, old ice, some of 
it at least seven feet thick; even the-Larsen is having difficulty 
forcing her way through it, so we have spent a good part of 
the day ramming, then backing and filling. It has been very 
hard on the helmsman. I wish the City had more power. On 
several occasions we came very near plowing into the Larsen 
before we could get her started astern. Still, I cannot criticize 
the old ship too much. She impresses one with her great 
strength. All day long, the sharp jagged edges of ice have 
been stabbing her greenheart flanks below the water line, 
but to no avail. One can well believe her claim to being one 
of the strongest ships in the world. 

I have been delighted by the way in which the aviators 
function at the watch. June, Smith, Balchen and Parker have 
been exceptionally good at this. It seems strange they should 
be better than sailors at this job. Probably flying sharpens 


the sense of depth perception and speed. Davies and Adams 1 
have also been very good. 


| "Lt. Harry Adams, second mate of the City, a retired naval officer 
with thirty years service and a very splendid record. 


THROUGH THE PACK 73 


We sighted our first penguins today. First, a lone Em- 
peror Penguin, which was nearly four feet tall. In attitude and 
action, he more than lived up to his reputation as the aristo- 
crat among his kind. This most primitive of birds, which alone 
of all animals survived the glaciation of the once tropical or 
semi-tropical Antarctic, was standing erect, when we caught 
sight of him, and his attitude plainly implied a lordly pro- 
prietorship over the wastes he surveyed. His resemblance to 
man in formal dress was so close as to be positively embar- 
rassing. To see him standing so, dignified, unafraid—did I 
not also detect scorn?—gave one the feeling that one should 
address him in carefully chosen speech. Alas, he paid scant 
attention to us. A scant bow, beak touching the breast, not at 
all the ceremonial bow for which he is distinguished, then off 
he went. 

Presently we came across a batch of the more gregarious 
Adelies, and there was great hilarity aboard for a while. These 
comical creatures came to us unafraid, with friendly waves of 
the flippers, tobogganing with great speed on their bellies 
across the ice floes. During pauses, several of the men jumped 
on the ice and played with them. 

Apparently the Adelies took it in fun, for, as I write, three 
or four of them are following along behind me, swimming 
like fish through the water, diving under loose floes, and com- 
ing up with uncanny accuracy on the other side. Now and 
then they scramble on a floe and by prodigious use of their 
flippers race across it as fast as a man can walk briskly. 


Tuesday 
December 18, 1928 


A terrific tussle in the ice today. Captain Nilsen is appar- 
ently disturbed. He radioed us this morning that unless 
we do better work—that is, unless we keep the line taut—he 
would have to cast us loose. Apparently he fears we shall 
either collide with him or else the line will foul his propeller. 
I can scarcely blame him, but I assured him, as forcefully 
as I could, that we shall continue to do our best. To lose 
the tow at this stage of the journey would be a real setback. 
Save for the lane behind us, we are shut in by a solid wall 


74 LITTLE AMERICA 


of ice. It would take us weeks to get out under our own 
power. The ice is very hummocky, and is very much eroded— 
from the rigging it appears like the surface of the moon when 
viewed through a telescope. 

We have been pounding all day. Down below, in the 
fo’c’s’le, it is like standing in a chamber the walls of which 
are being pounded with giant hammers. One could not help 
growing alarmed over the shocks. Can the ship continue 
to stand them? There would come an impact, the floor would 
tilt alarmingly, then the ship would sag with groaning timbers 
and the shriek of cracking ice sounded outside. A good thing 
for us thirty-four inches of tough planking stand between. 

Try as we may, we cannot avoid the thick ice cakes which 
close in behind the Larsen. When she makes a turn the tow 
line drags us into sharp ice corners. We go by fits and starts. 
It is a wonderful thing to see the Larsen in action, but even 
she has had to draw upon her immense reserve of power to 
keep underway. Sometimes it is a matter of forcing a few 
floes apart. She knifes them at a thrust. 

Sometimes she thus gains, at a single stroke, a mile 
or two of clear water. More often it is a matter of a few 
yards, when a stubborn floe threatens to resist every charge. 

What a fighter this man Nilsen is! 

To add to our troubles it has been snowing hard. 


Night, 
Same day. 


We are still in tow, although just a few minutes ago we 
came very near hitting the Larsen again. The only casualty 
however, was aboard the City. In trying to avoid the Larsen, 
which stopped suddenly, we had backed up on a floe, which 
struck the rudder a terrific blow and spun the wheel so hard 
it caught Captain Melville, who was standing alongside, and 
threw him to the deck, knocking him out for a moment. I 
found him struggling to a sitting position, still quite dazed, 
with a nasty cut over the eye. In spite of it, he insisted on 
remaining on deck. 

Ice conditions continue bad. How many times we have 
climbed the rigging to study the situation I would hesitate to 


TROUGH THE PACK 75 


say. There was no sign of She dark streaks in the sky telling 
of open water ahead. Icebergs crept all around us. Some 
of them were plowing through the pack under considerable 
momentum supplied by the wind and deep current working 
together. It would not do to get beset and have one of these 
monsters bear down on us. It was exciting to stand in the 
rigging and feel the give and take of the ship; and hear the 
rumbling of ice under her bow and the hiss of it pressing 
along the side. Though the delay involved in this struggle is 
irksome, there is in it a savagery and doggedness that is ex- 
hilarating. 

For most of the men the situation has lost its seriousness 
—familiarity does breed contempt. From the fo’c’s’le comes 
the lilting tune of a Norwegian folk song—Strom is entertain- 
ing them with his accordion. It is a very comfortable scene 
there, with a few lanterns throwing a pale yellow light into the 
darker shadows; and the faces of the men lolling in the bunks, 
or crowded about the mess table, stand out sharply in the 
glow. Ronne is bent over his sewing machine in the forecastle, 
his nimble fingers flying faster than the tune. I have never 
seen such a man. Let the world about him turn gay or mel- 
ancholy, Ronne is unaffected ; he works all day without a pause 
except to eat, and seems to find great content in it. 

The snow storm has passed, and out of a gray indefi- 
nite haze the sun stole back, to give us an enchanting mid- 
night display. 


Thursday, Friday and Saturday were much the same. No 
relief from the interminable pounding, the slowest kind of 
progress and a baffling mixture of sunny and stormy weather. 
We had hoped to get through the pack in two or three days, 
and were in it more than eight. We fought our way through 
the areas of very hard ice, once coming across vast trackless 
fields full of volcano-shaped structures, the cones of which 
sometimes attained a height of ten feet. Other fields were 
jumbled masses of caked ice that gave every appearance of 
having been subjected to terrific pressure. The one solace 
our position offered was comparative immunity to storm: 
the pack effectively dampened the sea, despite the snow squalls 
that beset us, and the swell was the longest I ever witnessed. 


76 LITTLE AMERICA 


We ceaselessly scanned the southern sky, looking for open 
water: but only the eternal high-blink of ice, ice everywhere. 
But at last a change came. On the morning of Sunday, the 
23rd, there was the merest suggestion of increased movement 
in the ice, and from a distance came the muted sounds of some 
disturbance. A black line, that grew larger as we watched, 
spread across the southern sky. Open water! 

The last fifty miles were the hardest, probably because the 
proximity of escape made us impatient. Still, I think we 
took our most violent pounding then, for we struggled through 
a rampart of floes that repeatedly snuffed out our motion and 
ground us to a halt. We stubbornly made our way past ice 
which was as high as the poop deck, and the walls were so clean 
and smooth as to suggest they might have been cut out by 
machine. Then, to the south, we described a vast battlement 
of flat-topped bergs, stretching from east to west, with thin 
streaks of open water showing in between. It was the southern 
edge of the pack, and the gateway to the Ross Sea. We 
hurried on, making better time, as the floes became more 
scattered and the ice a mushy, coagulated mass hardly more 
resistant than soup. At eleven o’clock we had the swell of the 
Ross Sea under foot, a fact that speedily undermined the false 
sense of security several of the men had built up in quieted 
seas of the pack, and with a blue sky overhead and the tow line 
taut as a bow string, we continued due south. 

The Larsen towed us until two o’clock, when the appearance 
of whales compelled Captain Nilsen to turn to a more lucra- 
tive occupation than acting as escort. His final gift to us was 
a pile of whale meat, young whale for the men and older whale 
for the dogs, which we hung in the rigging to dry. There was 
little time for amenities. Time was as precious to us as it 
was to him. We bade goodbye till another fourteen months to 
this excellent friend, then with all sails set and under steam 
we drove south, for whatever fate held in store for us. A 
last glance backward showed the Larsen in the shadow of 
the ice, and a chaser spurting madly, with white showing 
under her bow, after a plunging whale. 


CHAPTER IV
WE ESTABLISH A BASE


On our second Christmas Day (we had two because we 
recrossed the 180th Meridian) an imperceptible brightening 
in the southern sky—“barrier blink” —suggested the prox- 
imity of the Barrier. As the second was the official Christ- 
mas Day, I sacrificed a ton or two of coal for sentimental 
reasons, in speeding up engine revolutions, hoping thereby 
to make the Barrier before the end of the day. I felt that 
a glimpse of this mysterious Antarctic rampart which we had 
fought so hard to gain would be an exciting gift to the men. 
The Ross Sea was smooth as a mill pond, and the air so 
fresh and pure that breath was a delight. For all the anxiety 
with which we anticipated landing, we went forward with 
our celebration. It was a most excellent affair. Tennant 
served a fine dinner, Lofgren as toastmaster kept things 
humming, and our physicist, Taffy Davies, took the part of 
Santa Claus as only a Welshman can. With journey’s end 
so near, our happiness was sincere and infectious. In the 
midst of this, Strom’s voice from the crow’s nest—“Barrier 
on the starboard bow’”—fell with the especially abrupt swift- 
ness that long awaited news always assumes. There was a 
clatter of dishes hastily dropped or pushed aside, the race 
of footsteps up the companionway and a wild crowding of 
men on She fo’c’s’le head and in the rigging. The thing we 
had come so far to see was before our eyes, a far-flung 
reach of lifted ice, stretching east and west as far as the eye 
could see. In the distance it appeared low and flat, not yet 
impressive, but there it was, the mysterious Barrier. Simul- 
taneously excitement laid hold of the crew: they cheered 
enthusiastically and pounded on one another’s back. 

The City drove slightly to the right, to avoid a large pack 


77 


78 LITTLE AMERICA 


of ice which stood between us and the Barrier. The course 
was then laid for Discovery Inlet. In the back of my mind 
was the idea that, if we should be unable to base in the 
Bay of Whales, we might find a base in Discovery Inlet. The 
Barrier grew steadily before our gaze, and we saw that its 
sheer white cliff rose eighty or ninety feet from the sea at its 
foot. Awe seized one with the realization that this tower- 
ing rampart, which extended east and west for more than 
four hundred miles, and south for an equal distance, was, 
except in the few places where it apparently touches land, 
floating on the sea. If the high cliffs which show above the 
surface are majestic, how much more majestic must be the 
mass submerged? Five or six to one would be a conservative 
estimate of the proportion below sea level. This immense 
moving, water-born ice sheet is the last retreating remnant 
of a colossal sheet of ice which, during the period of maxi- 
mum glaciation, completely covered the continent and lay 
on the floor of the Ross Sea. With this creation of an ancient 
ice age before us, inspiring reverie, it was rather shocking to 
find that the provocative sounds which the ear was trying to 
pick up came from the loudspeaker in She fo’c’s’le—a jazz band 
broadcasting from a radio station.. 

We reached the Barrier at Long. 177° 25’ W., came 
alongside and cruised all night and part of the next day 
almost in its shadow. Caution stifled our curiosity, and we 
rarely ventured nearer than a mile from the base. The 
scarred and jagged wall commanded respect; one had the 
fear that an overhanging cliff might let go with scant warn- 
ing. For here were the breeding grounds of the icebergs, 
and deep wounds in the Barrier walls told of the labor that 
brought forth the bergs that prowled the Ross Sea. Near 
the water’s edge, the Barrier in places was honeycombed 
with caves, of bewildering shapes and sizes, which, when the 
sun struck them at just the right angle, blazed with a rich 
blue coloration. We took soundings every hour, and they 
showed an average of 250 to 300 fathoms of water. Davies 
and Quin Blackburn, the surveyor, were meanwhile busy with 
their pencils, sketching the Barrier as it paraded past. 

We made out the mouth of Discovery Inlet shortly after 
eight o’clock in the morning, and three hours later were 


WE ESTABLISH: A BASE 79 


inside. We found ourselves in a long narrow harbor, running 
east and west, imprisoned between cliffs which rose, perpen- 
dicularly in places, 100 feet above sea level. These walls 
were smooth for the most part, but here and there were 
shattered and cracked as by some great disturbance. Even 
though it was mid-summer in the inverted seasons of these 
polar regions, we found the harbor filled with bay ice for 
more than three quarters of its length; a minor wall, it 
curved crescent-like between the precipitous sides of the 
Barrier, effectively halting our advance. As we prepared 
to moor off its edge, the aviator Parker made a flying leap 
ashore with the cry: “The Marines are always the first 
ashore.” A dozen more tumbled after him; in a moment She 
silence of the bay was broken with their shouts. Plankings 
were hastily put to use as gangways, a bunch of the dogs 
were let loose for much needed exercise, and a number of 
the men, who had been instructed in skiing by the Nor- 
wegians, made ready to try their luck under polar conditions. 

The need for haste, which was always with us, reasserted 
itself; and Balchen, Braathen, Strom, Petersen and I set 
out on skis to the eastward, in search of a possible landing 
field; meanwhile another group of men started out to explore 
the fascinating caves in the Barrier. Our trip proved worth- 
while from a geographical point of view, for it greatly ex- 
tended the known size of the Inlet. Instead of running east 
and west and ending about ten miles from the mouth, as 
shown on the charts, we found there is a general curve from 
the east to the south. At the beginning of the curve, the 
inlet narrowed down into an inner bay, on the western side 
of which we observed two snow-covered ice hills rising forty 
or fifty feet above the Barrier, which was very nearly 150 
feet high at this point. These little hillocks (relatively) were 
fissured by pressure, a most interesting discovery, for it 
suggested an explanation as to why this harbor keeps its 
shape: beyond a doubt land lies underneath, holding the 
Barrier intact at this point. Beyond these hillocks the bay 
widened slightly, continued in a southerly direction for several 
miles and appeared to end in front of an enormous boulder- 
like formation of ice, behind which we saw a wide crevasse 
extending four or five miles. 


80 LITTLE AMERICA 


In making this survey, we found a place about three 
quarters of the distance between the ship and the end of the 
harbor where the Barrier fell in a gentle slope to the bay 
ice, and up this we made our way: we managed to climb 
150 feet, and yet did not attain the level floor of the Barrier. 
From this eminence, however, we had a fine view of the inlet 
and the mysterious hinterland beyond, stretching empty and 
rolling to the south. I wished I might have spent more time 
exploring this glaciological perplexity, but we had already 
been out several hours and I was anxious to get on to the 
Bay of Whales. We found no good landing field. So we 
turned back. 

For the first time, we had to cope with the extraordinary 
visibility with which the Antarctic baffles all travellers. An 
impalpable haze took possession of the atmosphere, in which 
the eyes became uncertain and the relative distance of objects 
confused. We stumbled across little rises in the snow we 
did not see, and breathlessly plunged down declines before 
we knew we were on them. A hump of snow that seemed 
under our noses turned out to be fifty yards away. It was 
all very confusing, and we were tired when we reached the 
ship. We had covered about twenty miles on skis, a lengthy 
journey for those of us who were not used to them. I must 
confess that I was a lame duck on the journey. 

On reaching the ship, we found her rising and falling 
on a strong swell. The ice where she lay was broken up and 
had already begun to go out, and several large floes were 
bumping her sides. Realizing that a storm might be a serious 
matter under these conditions, I gave orders to have all men 
brought aboard and to put out at once. A warning blast 
was sounded on the whistle, and a moment later the last 
stragglers came dashing across the ice. 


Midnight 
Dec. 26, 1930 
En route to Bay of Whales 
We're at sea now, coasting along the edge of the Barrier, 
heading for the Bay of Whales. Were under sail alone— 
trying to save coal. We now have constant daylight. At 
midnight it is scarcely less bright than at noon. 


THE City of New York IN PACK Ick, 


a 


(Courtesy Paramount.) 


THE Eleanor Bolling IN THE PACK. 


WE ESTABLISH A BASE 8t 


Getting the City started was a job. The men who had 
been ashore came back exhausted, and after dinner were 
asleep in their chairs. Scarcely enough hands could be 
mustered into action to get sail, and the second watch is still 
on duty—sixteen hours of work for them. This must not 
be allowed to happen again. Until we know more about this 
region, we must be constantly alert. 

Every one commented on the penetrating quality of the 
cold. For all the heat of the sun, the light wind cut through 
light clothing like a knife; and on the Barrier especially, it 
was so cold that one could not stand still for more than a 
few seconds at a time. 

My mind as to the men is now made up. Gould I have 
made Second in Command. A splendid fellow, competent, a 
brilliant geologist, and popular with men. He has proper 
respect for the seriousness of the job. Naturally, he is greatly 
interested in the scientific results, and this is most important 
in the Second in Command. He will do well, I am sure, 
and I am fortunate to have him. I am now casting about 
for a Third in Command; McKinley, I think, will be the man. 
He is one of the most delightful and charming men I have 
ever known. Reserved to the point of reticence, he neverthe- 
less is outspoken when the proper time for speech comes. He 
is a former army officer, with years of experience in handling 
men, and seems to possess that tactfulness and sympathy that 
makes for efficient leadership. 

Picking the senior in charge of the aviation unit was a 
more difficult thing. For here I had the job of selecting a 
man from four specialists, each with his special qualifications 
and claims, and all of them unusual men. I had selected 
them from hundreds. In the end my choice was Balchen, 
because of his service with me in the past, his knowledge of 
polar conditions and, above everything else, his great loyalty 
to whatever cause he serves. It was the latter quality, I 
think, that moved me most. We have been through much 
together—Bernt and I—and I know him. His service alone 
entitles him to the senior post in aviation. I cannot speak 
too highly of the manner in which Dean Smith, June and 
Parker took the news. With such splendid fellows with me, 
I can await the future with untroubled mind. 


82 LITTLE AMERICA 


Brophy, however, has begun to worry me. The tone 
and wording of his radios indicate that something is decidedly 
wrong. His messages are verbose and erratic. The job of 
getting the Bolling ready} seems to have vexed his patience, 
and now I find myself compelled to make decisions on the 
loading of a ship more than 2,000 miles away. Such matters 
have kept me up most of the night for nearly a week. Brophy 
was on the verge of a nervous breakdown when we left, and 
it may be that he is seriously ill. I must ask him to be frank 
on this point. 

Twenty-four hours now will tell the story. Shall we 
be able to get into the Bay of Whales? Shall we find a low 
place in the Barrier where we can unload supplies? Our 
fate turns upon these things. But I am too exhausted to 
bother. The sound of the wind in the rigging, the soft slap 
of the waves against the sides of the ship are an irresistible 
suggestion to sleep. Cheerio. 


It was only a cat’s-nap, however. I was up and about 
in time to see the City round the eastern portal of Dis- 
covery Harbor at about four a. m. The four to eight watch 
proved so drowsy, however, it was hours before we had all 
sails set. I urged Captain Melville not to use the engines 
except when absolutely necessary. Drawing near the end of 
the journey, I saw the need for greater caution, and took 
advantage of the time to prepare a number of safety rules, 
with the assistance of Gould, which I caused to be posted 
on the bulletin board. It was natural that the men should 
have little respect for ice conditions, none of them, with the 
exception of Ronne, having been in the Antarctic before: 
and Ronne had remained only a few weeks. My own knowl- 
edge came largely from our two Arctic expeditions, Ant- 
arctic literature and discussion with explorers, still it was 
sufficient to instill in me a great distrust. The danger of 
falling down an unseen crevasse or floating away on a piece 
of bay ice that suddenly detaches itself from the main body 
is always present: and the last thing I wanted was a casualty. 


"The Bolling reached New Zealand on Dec. 201, and was then making 
ready for a trip to the Barrier. 


WE ESTABLISH A BASE 83 


So I announced, that the regulations restricting the move- 
ments of landing parties would be strictly enforced. 

These regulations said, in part: 

“Crevasses in the ice barrier and floating bay ice, and 
getting lost in storms are, it appears, the biggest hazard that 
the expedition (other than flyers and trail parties) will en- 
counter. 

“Fortunately, the Ross Ice Barrier, except in the prox- 
imity of land, has, so far as we know, very few crevasses. 
However, men out on unknown terrain should keep constantly 
on the alert for crevasses. 

“Except in cases of extreme emergency, travelling over 
unknown areas shall be done by not less than three men, and 
whatever party sets out should use Alpine rope and bamboo 
poles. 

“Frequently there is no indication on the snow to warn 
of a dangerous crevasse. If Alpine ropes are used, together 
with the bamboo pole or skis, there will be little or no danger. 

“Some crevasses, of course, are not covered by a snow 
bridge. Some that are so covered show a slight rounding 
of the snow above the level of the Barrier area. Whatever 
crevasses may be near the base should be inspected by every 
member of the expedition so that he may familiarize himself 
with their character. 

“The first scouting party to leave the ship for the pro- 
posed base will use special care in searching for crevasses. 
Skis distribute the weight in such a way that, in passing 
over a snow-covered crevasse, there is less danger in falling 
through. Snow shoes also distribute the weight, and long 
snow shoes have been provided for the reason they distribute 
the weight more widely than shorter ones. 

“The ship will probably unload alongside the bay ice. 
Cracks may appear in this ice at any time, and therefore 
every man should be on the watch for them. The weather 
is fairly cold, and frequently a man falling into cold water 
in heavy clothes cannot drag himself back onto the ice. Where 
practicable, therefore, men should travel over the bay ice in 
pairs or groups. 

“To prevent casualty from getting lost in a storm, parties 
should not go any distance from the base without having a 


84 LITTLE AMERICA 


competent navigator along. There is considerable variation 
in the compass in this district—about 106 degrees from true. 

“It is very easy to lose one’s way in a snow storm. 
Storms here may rage for days. On a number of occasions 
it has happened that men on exploring parties have lost their 
lives by losing their way only a few miles from base. I wish 
to emphasize this point especially. 

“There are two competent weather men on the expedition, 
and weather predictions will always be available at the base. 

“Special parties going out from the ship shall be desig- 
nated Nos. 1 and 2, and will respond to the following signals: 

“1 blast on ship’s whistle: Party No. t returns at once. 

“2 blasts on the ship’s whistle: Party No. 2 returns at 
once. 

“2 blasts on ship’s whistle, or flag on mainmast: Storm 
warning, and all hands will return to ship at once.” 


As the day wore on, and we busied ourselves preparing 
for the manifold tasks that would attend landing, an air 
of uncertainty descended upon the City. So much did depend 
upon what we found! Even the dullest men sensed the 
magnitude of our problem. If the ice in the Bay of Whales 
had not gone out, we faced the heart-breaking tasks of 
sledging several hundred tons of supplies over miles of 
treacherous ice. Even with favorable conditions, the opera- 
tion would be difficult and perilous; if conditions were bad, 
it might be impossible. Leaving the dog men to their duties 
of overhauling gear and sledges for the first dash, I returned 
to the library, to refresh my mind for the last time with the 
limited information about this place that I now knew nearly 
by heart. 

What would we find at the end? Shackleton passed the 
Bay of Whales in January, 1908, and James Murray, his 
biologist, described it thus: 1 

“The desolation and lifelessness of the Antarctic were 
fully realized as we approached the great Ice Barrier. There 
was no living thing in sight as we steamed eastward, tracing 
the line of this immense glacier. Towards midnight there 
opened suddenly on our sight a scene of abounding life. 

* Shackleton, “Heart of the Antarctic,” ii, p. 233. 


WE ESTABLISH A BASE 85 


The cliff of the Barrier terminated, and a wide bay opened 
up, extending far to the south, and partly filled by fast ice 
of one season’s growth. Away to the eastward the cliff 
recommenced. This bay, which we afterwards referred to 
by the appropriate name of the Bay of Whales, was teeming 
with all the familiar kinds of Antarctic life. Hundreds of 
whales, killers, finners and hump-backs, were rising and blow- 
ing all around. On the ice groups of Weddell seals were 
basking in the midnight sunshine. Emperor penguins were 
standing about or tobogganing in unconcerned parties. Skua 
gulls were flying heavily, or sitting drowsily on the ice...” 

But the spectacle that delighted the eyes of the biologist 
Murray did not have the same effect on the explorer 
Shackleton, in search of a place for a base, and harassed by 
the pack ice menacing his ship. He recognized it as the 
place where Borchgrevink landed in 1900, and believed that 
Scott’s Discovery expedition, of which he was a member, 
passed the same inlet ip a fog two years later. But he 
saw that something colossal had meanwhile happened. Miles 
of the Barrier had apparently calved off, in a magnificent, 
unseen demonstration, the inlet was swallowed up, leaving 
a long wide bay joining up with Borchgrevink’s inlet, and 
the whole “was now merged in what we had called the Bay 
of Whales.” 2 To Shackleton, the discovery of this change 
was a great disappointment, and complimenting himself upon 
having escaped a terrible fate, he sped the Nimrod out to the 
Bay, with the thought in mind that this disturbance might 
have occurred while his party was there: “(it) made me 
decide then and there that under no circumstances would I 
winter on the Barrier, and that wherever we did land we 
would secure a solid rock foundation for our winter home.” 3 

It was this decision which, more than any other factor, 
defeated Shackleton’s ambition to be the first to the South Pole 
and vitally affected the whole course of exploration in the 
Antarctic. For until a man, with shrewd eyes, indomitable 
spirit and the will to risk when risk was necessary, started to 
analyze things, the idea of wintering on the Barrier was held 
to be madness. 


1 Shackleton, “Heart of the Antarctic,” i, p. 72. 
abid i, p. 75. 3 Heart of the Antarctic,” i, p. 76. 


86 LITTLE AMERICA 


The man was Amundsen. He carefully studied all infor- 
mation bearing on the Barrier, and it recommended itself 
to him as a base for the reason it was the farthest south 
one could go by ship “a whole degree farther south than 
Scott could hope to get in McMurdo Sound.” * And from 
Shackleton’s discouraging report he drew the startling con- 
clusion that this “peculiar formation in the Barrier is nothing 
more than the selfsame bight that was observed by Sir James 
Clark Ross—no doubt with great changes of outline, but 
still the same. For seventy years, then, this formation— 
with the exception of the pieces that had broken away—had 
persisted in the same place. I therefore concluded that it 
could be no accidental formation. What, once, in the dawn 
of time, arrested the mighty stream of ice at this spot and 
formed a lasting bay in its edge, which with a few exceptions 
runs in an almost straight line, was not merely a passing whim 
of the fearful force that came crashing on, but something 
even stronger than that—something that was firmer than 
the hard ice—namely, the solid land. Here in this spot, 
then, the Barrier piled itself up and formed the bay we now 
call the Bay of Whales. The observations we made during 
our stay there confirm the correctness of this theory.” ? 
Amundsen, who had a great respect for Shackleton, has told 
me that if Shackleton had based at the Bay of Whales, he 
would have been the first to reach the South Pole. 

We knew we would find security in the Bay of Whales, if 
we based near Framheim. The fear of the Barrier dis- 
integrating and carrying our base out to sea was therefore 
a minor possibility. It was a chance worth taking. The 
thing that vexed me was the possibility we might find the 
bay entirely locked in ice, which would force us to stand 
idly by, using up coal which was now precious as gold, until 
it broke up. Time was fleeting, and the task of unloading 
and setting up a base would take weeks. 

What did history show? In February, 1900, and February, 
1902, Borchgrevink and Scott, respectively, found the Bay 
open.* A3 late as January 24, 1908, Shackleton found the 

* Amundsen, “The South Pole,” i, p. 47. 


*Amundsen, “The South Pole,” i, p. 49. 
* Hayes, “Antarctica,” p. 376. 


ME - ESTABLISH A BASE 87 


Bay full of ice. Amundsen, years later, January 13, found 
the Bay open, with the ice half gone and moving out rapidly. 
The following year the bay ice did not begin to go out until 
the third week in January; and when Captain Larsen took 
the Ross in, in December, 1923, and January, 1924, Captain 
Nilsen had told me, he found the Bay completely ice-locked. 

The record was clear on one point: our chances of find- 
ing the Bay swept clean of ice at this early date were decidedly 
slender. Nevertheless, short odds or no, it was a gamble 
we had to take. 

As we cruised along its lee the Barrier constantly changed 
its outline. It is by no means the formidable uniformity 
we believe it to be. Its structure varied in height from 70 
to 125 feet, small inlets and fractures marked its profile, and 
scarred cliffs reflected the sun, in chill blue and white, like 
great reflectors. The instability of the Barrier was forcibly 
impressed upon us. Occasionally there came from the dis- 
tance a boom as of remote thunder—the sound of ice cliffs 
crumbling; and once, as I watched, the face of the Barrier 
miles away tore loose and fell in a showery cataract of ice. 
The sea when we drew near was littered with debris, in which 
several minor icebergs floated proudly in the newness of birth. 
Not very pleasant, really. This process is called “calving.” 

During the morning watch, December 28, we sighted the 
western gateway to the Bay of Whales, and stood off the 
entrance some time later. West and east the northern portals 
of the Bay, which we knew were about twenty miles apart, 
were shrouded in a drifting haze, so we could see no more 
than a few miles in either direction. But as we crept within 
sight of the western wall, gingerly feeling out our way, a 
glimpse of the full stature of the cliffs was occasionally had: 
it was with awe that we realized over 100 feet of steep, sheer 
tightly packed snow lay between water’s edge and summit. 
I strained with all my might to make out something in the 
mist shadows ahead; hoping against hope for clear water, 
then hearing the slap of waves against ice. 

The Bay still held in its bosom a solid wall of ice that 
the power of half a dozen vessels of the City’s power could 
not bend aside. It was a disappointing finding. We changed 
course sharply, veering to the right, but progress in this 


88 LITTLE AMERICA 


direction brought no improvement. When wind brushed the 
haze aside, we saw that the bay ice, which in places was 
so heavily crossed and ridged by pressure as to appear im- 
passable, stretched solidly from West Cape to the eastern 
wall of the Barrier. At least eight miles of it lay between 
us and the place where we hoped to establish our base. There 
was no doubting the fact the ice was far north of the point 
where Amundsen found it, 1 I realized there was much dirty 
work cut out for us. 

We moored to the edge of the bay ice with ice anchors, 
which were hammered into the ice some distance from the 
ship, and hastily made ready for a trip of inquiry. Our 
great need at the moment was to find a suitable place for 
a base: worry over getting supplies to it could come next. 
By seven o'clock we were ready to start. Two dog teams 
were ready, Walden’s and Vaughan’s. On one of them 
Petersen had packed a portable radio set, and with him, 
Balchen and Braathen, our ski experts, I started across the 
ice, striking for the eastern wall of the Barrier, where it 
sloped to within thirty feet of sea level. 

To the south the bay ice was criss-crossed by pressure 
ridges: near the Barrier massive blocks had been forced up; 
these we avoided carefully, picking our way round-about over 
fairly smooth ice until we neared the place where the Barrier 
descended to the bay ice. Here we found the whole eastern 
edge marked by crevasses, which had been partly drifted and 
closed by snow. We found a way through them, and gained 
the Barrier via a gentle snow incline. Before we ventured 
any farther, I insisted the party be roped together, lest an in- 
cautious traveller find himself plunged suddenly into a cre- 
vasse. In this manner we made our way up the Barrier, 
which rose steadily, and presently we saw stretching before 
us, provocatively indefinite in the haze, the smooth roof of the 
Barrier stretching south. Our goal was Framheim, but though 
we knew that by then probably all trace of its existence had“ 
been obliterated, each of us, I think, had in his mind the 
thought that perhaps some quirk in Nature had left part of it 
exposed. We followed the Barrier’s edge for five or six miles 


' The Fram was moored 2.2 geographical miles from Framheim. “The 
South Pole,” i, p. 182. 


WE ESTABLISH A BASE 89 


and came to a place where the Barrier sloped gently into a 
kind of valley, but could tell very little about its shape. There 
was an extaordinary baffling condition of visibility. in which it 
was broad daylight and not foggy, yet we could see only sev- 
eral hundred feet and inequalities on the surface took on weird 
shapes. We had an oppressive, shut-in feeling—a strange 
feeling on the vast stretches of the Barrier. Westward this 
basin continued to descend into an inconspicuous inlet. 

We judged then that we were in the vicinity of Fram- 
heim, and the eagerness of the Norwegians, Balchen, 
Braathen and Petersen to locate the camp of their country- 
men, was infectious. Petersen and Balchen skied to the 
southward to inspect a haycock which they thought might 
cover the house Amundsen left behind. Braathan and I went 
to the westward and descended the slope which fell into what 
was apparently a small bay. We scanned the scene for the 
sight of the two great pressure blocks that Amundsen told 
of, Mounts Nelson and Ronniken, but saw not a trace of 
them. Braathen shrieked, “I see a peak,—there is Mt. 
Ronniken”—which he took to be about 75 feet high and 
some distance off. He made for it as fast as he could propel 
his skis, only to be greatly chagrined to discover the “peak” 
was no higher than his shoulders and almost at the end of 
his nose. Such, at times, are the confounding properties of 
Antarctic visibility. 

It may well be, as I concluded then, that these ridges, 
which Amundsen described as huge, “raising their highest 
summits over 100 feet in She air,” t have been entirely drifted 
over during the intervening years. Certainly nothing that 
approached his description of them was visible. We con- 
tinued on about a mile to the end of the bay, for such we 
saw it to be, and found that it debouched into the Bay of 
Whales amidst a chaos of pressure ridges that in the dimness 
looked like pre-historic monsters. We selected a camp site 
on a level piece of ice that was nearly surrounded by chaotic 
ice shapes. The others followed our tracks and soon joined 
us and we pitched camp; the first members of an American 
expedition to sleep on the Antarctic Continent. My diary 
reports: 

1 Amundsen, “The South Pole,” i. 173. 


90 LITTLE AMERICA 


Midnight 
Dec. 30, 1928 
Camp on the Bay Ice 


It is as quiet here as in a tomb. Nothing stirs. The 
silence is so deep one could almost reach out and take hold 
of it. 

A moment ago I stepped outside the tent and was im- 
pressed anew with the deceiving effect of the Antarctic on 
the eye. Try as I could, screwing the eyes, I could not make 
out the distance of things from us, nor their shape. Skiing, 
it was the same. We glided smoothly over a surface and 
then all of a sudden came to a cropper on a slight upward 
slope we failed to see. We sighted a mountain of snow, 
miles off, and it turned out to be a haycock twenty yards 
away. We strove to reach a pressure ridge close aboard and 
found it still miles away. Just as I wrote the last sentence 
there came a sharp cracking noise directly under us and a 
rumble from not far away. Pressure is working in the ice 
and no doubt creating wide cracks in the Barrier. How- 
ever, this is no cause for alarm. 


I A.M. 
Jan. I, 1929 


We made an unsuccessful exploration trip today to the 
southward in an attempt to locate a base. We sledged over 
the bay ice close to the Barrier cliffs which rose sheer on our 
left hand to heights of 50 to 75 feet. The bay ice at its 
foot was rolling in thick, heavy ridges and cracks. There 
was no way up. As I was so inexpert with skis that I could 
not keep up with the Norwegians, I had to go without them, 
with the result that I fell through three or four cracks, thinly 
roofed over by snow. Each time I saved myself by spreading 
my arms. The others, however, slid over these easily with 
their skis. 

After travelling two or three miles south we came to a 
place where the Barrier descended to the bay ice in a long 
easy slope. Here the snow had filled in and provided a ramp 
to the Barrier. Petersen and I began to climb up. Just as 
Petersen reached the top. the fragile covering of the crevasse 


WE ESTABLISH A BASE 91 


gave way underneath him and only his skis saved him from 
a nasty fall. A moment later Walden’s heavily loaded sledge 
nearly went to the bottom of the sea through a slush hole 
in the ice, and Walden came within a hair’s breadth of fall- 
ing in while trying to save the sledge. His famous leader, 
Chinook, showed the greatest concern while watching his 
actions, and one had the feeling that he was determined to 
prevent his master from taking what he judged to be a 
foolish risk. 

On our return from this unsuccessful mission, Petersen 
and Balchen prepared the evening meal—pork and beans, 
bread and butter, peanut butter, biscuits and canned apple 
sauce for dessert. Few meals ever tasted better. I have for- 
gotten to mention that this is New Year’s Eve and we drank 
the New Year in with tea. 

Petersen has put up a bamboo pole to serve as a mast 
for his asheppe, his radio set is assembled and he is now 
working the key. Messages are flying between our camp and 
the ship. New inquiries have been relayed from Brophy in 
New Zealand, with respect to the loading of the Bolling. 
The radio beyond doubt has ended the isolation of this ice 
cap. As a practical thing, its help is priceless. But I can 
see where it is going to destroy all peace of mind, which is 
half the attraction of the polar regions. Our external diffi- 
culties must always be with us. 

The dogs have delighted me beyond words. They are 
so lively and strong one would never think they have been 
cooped up for more than a month. Terror, Vaughan’s 
leader, pulled today until he could hardly stand. The love 
these Eskimo dogs have for their work is quite wonderful. 
As we are about to start out from the City, one of the dogs 
appeared to be so lame that we decided to leave him behind, 
but he broke from the hands that held him and staggered to 
his place in the team. He seemed heart-broken, really, when 
we went off without him. We were off with a rush and a 
great flurry of snow, the dogs’ feet padding the snow with 
a soft noise and the sledge creaking and slamming on the 
unequal surface. 

We can see now that the wisest thing we have done was 
to insist upon bringing a great many dogs. We were assured 


92 LITTLE AMERICA 


that half the number we demanded would serve our purposes. 
But now, with the problem of unloading confronting us, we 
can use every one, and many more for that matter. 


Jan. Ist, 1929 


Tonight I may sleep with the certainty that the second 
phase of our operations—reaching She base—is concluded in 
satisfactory fashion. The third—unloading and creating the 
base—may perhaps be the most difficult task of all. It is 
a river we shall cross, however, when we come to it. We 
shall surely find a way across. 

Having failed yesterday to find a suitable location for 
a base to the southward, this morning Bernt and I returned 
to the bay we had followed when we glided down from 
the Barrier, and found that the slope at its head was a very 
gradual ascent to the Barrier. We climbed it. Visibility had 
slightly improved and we found ourselves in a kind of a 
basin. We recognized instantly that here was an excellent 
place for our base and named it Little America. It is 
splendidly protected by a high snow rim from the winds in 
all directions but west, and accessible from the point of view * 
of loading operations. We Baxe named the inlet Ver-sur- 
Mer Bay after the village that was so hospitable to us when 
we landed in France at the end of our trans-Atlantic flight. 

Today we returned to the ship, taking a circuitous route 
through the pressure ridge in the bay. Farther to the south 
we found the bay ice badly ridged by pressure. Beyond, the 
Bay ended against the Barrier, which rose, in a series of 
terraces, to considerable height. 

The dogs, refreshed by long sleep, fairly raced back to 
the City, and my hurrying thoughts preceded them. How 
best to accomplish the job of unloading tons of supplies in 
a single month allowed us? Balchen had remained in the 
tent we set up at the base, and I made up my mind to send 
Gould in at once to take charge of the temporary camp, and 
with it the responsibility of putting up the houses and getting 
the camp ready for winter. McKinley is to have charge of 
supervising the transport of supplies from the City to Little 
America. He will have a very difficult task to keep them 
moving on schedule. George Black, another member of the 


WE ESTABLISH A BASE 93 


North Pole Expedition, has been made supply officer. In that 
capacity he will keep track of all supplies. 

We have decided to unload the City directly on the bay 
ice. This was a decision over which I hesitated for some 
time, knowing that however firm the ice seemed to be it 
must presently break up, perhaps with scant warning and 
with attendant risk to supplies and personnel. It is true that 
patience is one of the strongest weapons with which man can 
combat polar regions but there inevitably comes a time when 
the long chance is the most wiser one. This seems to be 
such a time. 


There was much excitement aboard ship when we broke 
the news we had found a site for the base, and instantly 
preparations were begun to unload. The City was edged 
slightly to the east, to bring her nearer the Barrier and 
reduce the length of the trail by a few yards. Planks were 
run from the deck to the bay ice, and down this a stream 
of boxes, gasoline drums, crates and other articles commenced 
to pour in noisy confusion. As fast as these things touched 
the ice, a second party of men moved them back some distance 
from the edge, to minimize the risk of loss in case the ice 
started to break up. There was a great to-do as the dog men 
got their teams ready, for the dogs seemed to realize their 
enforced vacation was over and lively work was at hand. 
They rolled in the snow, dashed about in insane circles; and 
a number of them, at some fancied wrong, sprang at one 
another’s throats. There was serious work with the handle 
end of the whips before peace could be restored. But in 
time Walden, the Three Mu3ke v, and Jack Bursey had 
five teams in harness, eager” to go, and before lunch they 
started for Little America, sledges heaped high with supplies. 
An excellent way to start the New Year. They made a pretty 
sight snaking across the bay. The dogs’ tails waved like 
plumes, and the drivers hurried behind, cracking their long 
whips and chattering incessantly in the mad monologue that 
passes as language between driver and dogs. We kept them 
in sight until they moved up the low slope on the Barrier, 
and then lost them behind a ridge. Some time later Gould 
radioed the ship that he had found the site, that several tents 


94 LITTLE AMERICA 


were up and that Little America, the most southern American 
community, was formally colonized. 

We ran our teams thereafter with some attempt at rail- 
road precision. Perhaps we erred on the side of caution: 1 
do not think so, for it is my experience that in the polar 
regions the most careful way of doing things is often the 
fastest. First of all, we marked out the trail between vessel 
and base with red-orange flags, so chosen because of their 
relatively high visibility. These would serve as sign-posts 
in case a storm caught a driver on the trail. A lookout 
watch was permanently assigned to the crow’s nest, to follow 
the teams across the bay ice and watch’ for cracks in the ice. 
Besides this, the departure of every team from either terminal 
was reported by radio to the other end: the absence of a team 
that ran into difficulties, perhaps in crevasses, must soon be 
noticed. No team was allowed to travel alone. 

We drove, now, as if our lives depended upon it. 

Tuesday, January 2, we sent off seven teams, each fully 
loaded, to the base. On this day, an evil-looking crack opened 
up in the ice, cutting across the old trail, so the teams had to 
detour a mile to the westward to get around it. This made 
the sledge journey to the base. a total of nine miles—or 
eighteen miles for every load. Wednesday, we sent off eight 
teams. They had barely departed when a huge field of 
excessively roughened and jagged ice bore down on the ship 
from the eastward. To save the ship, we hastily got up 
steam and put out to sea, warning the base party of our 
departure by radio. We hoisted sail but dared not drift 
with the wind, as that would have driven us against the 
Barrier, so tacked about all night long, trying to conserve 
coal. It was a miserable night, for we collided with pieces 
of scattered pack continually, and the men were on duty 
nearly the entire night. 

Realizing how important now was the need for haste, to 
compensate for the loss of time that must result from re- 
currence of the same situation, we impressed every free hand 
and every dog that could move its bones into the service of 
transport. Men who were not on watch on the ship volunteered 
to man-haul supplies to a safe place on the bay ice, where 
they could be picked up by dog teams sent out for the base. 


WE ESTABLISH A BASE 95 


Dogs that were ignored in the first picking, because they had 
3o: been broken to harness or were less strong than the others, 
were welcomed into service like thoroughbreds. Saturday, 
the 5th, we had nine teams on the trail, and several of these 
made an extra trip to haul up the 4000 lbs. of supplies that 
nine men had laboriously hauled to the cache on the bay ice, 
That day we moved five tons to Little America. 


Sunday 
January 6, 1929 
Bay of Whales 


Worked like devils today—and a miserable four tons 
ashore to show for our efforts. We must do better. With 
the time at our disposal before the Bolling arrives, six tons 
per day is the minimum we can allow for: Ten would be 
more to my liking. But how to do better, is the question. 

I am delighted by the way in which the green drivers 
are handling their dogs. In a few weeks they will be veterans. 
Blackburn, de Ganahl and Siple are doing especially well, in 
view of the fact they never drove dogs before. Of course, the 
Three Musketeers and Walden are our mainstays. They have 
worked so long together that they know exactly what to do. 
Several of the new drivers, however, are having difficulty 
and today one of the teams broke loose half way between the 
ship and Little America, escaped from its driver and came 
running back to the ship. The driver came in much 
chagrined. 

The idea has been in my mind that we may have to 
freeze the City in for the winter, if we fail to land all 
supplies before the middle of February. The Bolling ought 
to reach here within a month; and she must be unloaded-— 
absolutely! “Freezing in” the City would complicate matters 
terribly and would also be dangerous. It must mean increasing 
the winter party by at least twenty men, with attendant over- 
crowding, besides enlarging responsibility. I shall not like it. 
However, let us see what another week brings. The Bolling 
presents an equally trying problem. No matter how much we 
rush, unless the ice goes out much farther to the south, I doubt 
whether we should have time to unload her before the bay be- 


96 LITTLE AMERICA 


gins to freeze over late in February. She cannot possibly 
survive even a slight squeeze. Moreover, I am reluctant to un- 
load the airplanes on the bay ice. A sudden break might drop 
them all to the bottom of the bay. Our only hope is to force 
the Bolling to the Barrier, unload her there, cache the supplies 
nearby and haul them to Little America after the ships go 
north. If we can get all the supplies on the Barrier during 
the next month, they will be reasonably safe there until we 
find time to move them to the base. From the rigging of 
the City we can see a place where the height of the Barrier 
drops to within 20 to 30 feet of the level of the bay ice, and 
what appears to be a tightly packed ramp of snow leads up 
to it gently. This would be just the place, but unfortunately 
at least two miles of thick bay ice lie between us and it. We 
must find a way to get in. 

A big lead opened up in the ice about four o’clock this 
afternoon, not far from the ship, forcing us to move our 
berth a quarter of a mile to the west, which means a longer 
journey for the teams. 

We tried breaking the ice this afternoon in an attempt 
to reduce the distance to the base—backed the City and 
charged it, full speed ahead. Gave it a number of fearful 
wallops, but with no success. The force of each charge 
carried the City well up on the ice, where she poised a 
moment, every yard clacking and loose things pounding in 
the ship, and then fell back, her screw protesting and churn- 
ing the water at her best speed. The impact was enough to 
throw an unwary man to the deck. 

We had to give that up. Using too much coal. The 
best we did was to chip off a few slivers of ice. 

Now we pray for a storm, whereas a few days ago we 
begged to be delivered from one. A walloping storm from 
the north would make waves that would break up the sea- 
ward edge of the bay ice, and we could make our way to a 
low place in the Barrier to the eastward. 

We have had a really severe epidemic of influenza; about 
forty percent of the men are suffering, with varying stages of 
severity. Doc Coman believes the germ was spread by the 
dogs. 

Everyone is dreadfully tired. 


‘punoisyoeg Ul 3111e 


‘yatt Ayayalodbta LV 4407 many fo (u) 


(3uposhele | Xboytod) 


SAN 


‘NJ ƏNISOTO chop MOV nym ‘SHIVH M 40 AVG FHL NI 32] AVG FHL AGISONOTY ayanlyayaya 4407 man fo Ku? yani 40 MIIA tytuyay 


WE ESTABLISH A BASE 97 


Next day there was some improvement. Part of the bay ice 
to which we were moored separated itself from the main pack 
under the gentle persuasion of a swell. We are able to make a 
new berth about half a mile to the south. By lightening 
slightly the weight of the loads, we found that four of the 
teams were able to make two round-trips in the same day. We 
now had ten teams on the ice, and I confess that even then I 
had my eyes on the last of the dogs, “‘the lame, the halt and the 
blind.” Dogs which everyone believed were wholly useless did 
excellent work. Chris Braathen made a splendid lead dog out 
of a motheaten husky that was blind in one eye. He calls him 
Moose-Moss-Mouse. 

Tuesday, the 8th, the lookout reported a lead running 
north and south had opened up to the eastward. We forced the 
City into it, and battered our way through a mass of drift ice 
to a position two miles nearer the base. With that our pros- 
pects brightened: if we could hold that position, all the teams 
ought to be able to average two trips per day. 

“Let’s go,” someone yelled. And instantly the discourage- 
ment seemed mysteriously to fall away. Fatigue that a mo- 
ment before seemed overpowering was brushed aside. Instead 
of seeming as distant and inaccessible as the South Pole, Little 
America came magically nearer within reach. We had a pre- 
taste of victory, and it made all the difference in the world. I 
have seen the same thing happen to football teams, one mo- 
ment in the slough of despond, and the next, owing to a 
fortuitous turn of fortune that brought them suddenly within 
striking distance of the goal, vividly infused with the psy- 
chology of victory. Here, on this forsaken tableland of ice, 
which Nature implacably refused to bend to our wishes, the 
thing was an interesting experience. We were close—closer 
than I care to remember—to humiliation, only to be carried 
ahead by a word we have, in the triteness and cynicism of our 
language, cheapened—the word faith. 


CHAPTER V 
THE BATTLE TO UNLOAD 


We did not lack for company. For all the tumult that 
accompanied unloading, the penguins continued to pay us 
formal calls, and it was not unusual to see as many as a score 
of them on the edge of the bay ice, watching operations with 
an unfeigned curiosity. The Emperors were in session most 
of the time, with the pompous gravity of state dignitaries. 
Standing three or four feet high, weighing 70 or 80 pounds, 
very handsome in their black coats, yellow waistcoats and 
orange-stained beaks, they strutted to and fro, giving voice 
every now and then to trumpet-like commands. When hunger 
moved them, they dived into the frigid waters in search of 
shrimp, swimming with astonishing grace and speed by rapid 
oscillations of their flippers. Seéing them waddle clumsily on 
land and swimming with the ease of fish, it was difficult to 
believe that these most primitive of birds once had the power 
to fly. 

The more comical and smaller Adelies were our constant 
companions. Their curiosity was insatiable and the undoing 
of many of them. Although we tried to frighten them away, 
from time to time one or two would insist upon investigating 
the dogs. Sometimes they came stealthily, heads cocked to 
one side; but other times they came impetuously, squawking 
dire threats and waving their flippers in a military manner. 
Such visits generally ended in a funeral. When the dogs 
struck, they struck hard. There were many such tragic epi- 
sodes, for the Adelies, shrewd little creatures though they 
seemed to be, could not quite get it into their pin-shaped heads 
that where the dogs lay, there also lay death. I once saw one 
little fellow attack single-handed a team of nine huskies. We 
plucked him from their jaws just in time, He showed no 


98 


THE BATTLE TO UNLOAD 99 


gratitude. When we set him free at a safe distance, his cocky 
attitude said plainly that he had certainly put it all over those 
strange beasts. 

The Adelies were absolutely without fear, which seemed 
strange in creatures so wild. Its absence, I think, is due to 
the fact that for centuries no surface animal, except the swoop- 
ing skua gull, which attacks the penguin chicks, has been their 
enemy. 

The bay ice abounded with seals. These dull-witted crea- 
tures had none of the attractive qualities of the penguins, 
for they spent most of the time sleeping beside open leads. 
Two types were common—the Crab-eater and the Weddell 
seal. The Crab-eater’s coat is a light brown color, and 
in the younger seals has a rich sheen. The coats of the 
old bulls were quite white. They were from 6 to 8 feet long. 
The Weddell seal has a thick coat, with black and gray mark- 
ings, and is much bigger than the Crab-eater. Both are 
rather stupid and uninteresting, but as they served as a food 
supply both for dogs and our own table we were constantly 
alert for them. 

They, too, had no fear of man. When approached gently, 
the Weddell seal simply opened sleepy eyes, stared at you a 
moment, then returned to slumber. But sometimes, on being 
prodded with a ski stick, they uttered an intimidating bellow, 
which so disconcerted some of our hunters that they retreated 
hastily, until they learned that this was just a hollow threat 
masking a craven heart. With that single show of force, the 
seal would make off in blubbery, undulating haste. The Crab- 
eaters were more courageous, and I came across one of them 
in a death struggle with two Eskimo dogs. It was sorely be- 
set, but undismayed. It maneuvered swiftly, and feinted with 
rapier-like deftness, drawing its head in to escape a slash from 
a dog and darting it out again to deliver one in retaliation. The 
Crab-eater’s coat was quite badly torn, but the dogs had not 
come off unharmed. They were bleeding from half a dozen 
wounds. 

During the summer months, the Bay of Whales was truly 
a recreation ground for whales. It was not unusual to see 
schools of from 40 to 50 sporting in the bay, sending up long, 
plume-like vapors and thrashing the water with their tails. 


100 LITTLE AMERICA 


Several times the vindictive Killer Whales were seen. They 
aroused dread, with their ugly snouts and ominous, triangular 
fins cutting the water, but they did not trouble us. Many deep 
and half-healed lacerations on the bodies of seals, however, 
showed how narrowly some of these ill-protected creatures had 
escaped annihilation. ' 

After a two-day interruption due to a blinding snow- 
storm, the unloading proceeded at top speed. The storm itself 
was a trial, as it blew with such strength as to test severely the 
five anchor lines we had on the ice. We were constantly 
menaced by ice fields creeping into the bay from the northeast, 
and once or twice heavy bergs were carried off by submarine 
currents just when it seemed they must crash down upon the 
City. The storm ceased, however, as quickly as it had come; 
a clear sky appeared and presently the dog teams, which had 
lain snugly in the tents at Little America, came dashing across 
the ice, eager to renew the job. The drivers brought the news 
that the walls of the main building had been put up, and had 
withstood the storm. The roof, they said, would be put on 
that day, the 12th, and the American flag hoisted over the 
structure. Come what might, we had in that house shelter 
for thirty men. It was gratifying to know that. Gould, 
Balchen, Hump Creagh, McKinley, Davies, Teddy Bayer, en- 
gineer of the City, Jim Feury, a fireman, and Chips Gould, 
the carpenter, comprised the working force in Little America 
at the time. To Bayer and Feury had been given the disagree- 
able job of erecting the three 65 foot radio towers. This 
involved much handling of iron work with bare hands at 
punishing temperatures. 

We were then principally unloading the scientific gear. 
This material was bulky and heavy, but as the objects of the 
expedition were scientific, I was determined to get this stuff 
ashore at all costs. To the aviators was entrusted the task of 
getting the Fairchild on the ice and in flying trim. June was 
put in charge of this operation, and on Sunday, January 13th, 
he had the crate on the ice. In a few minutes they were rip- 
ping it apart with hammers. “We’ll have it in the air within 
forty-eight hours,” he promised. 

That same day we inaugurated a programme of economy. 
The so-called luxuries, butter, sugar, jam, etc., were there- 


‘LOODS loya ATIS tayd ‘Samyaixy 1544 AGH] yao INC nul ‘WY, SSATG ‘S90q AH] 


‘ 


` 


chxalacha3y1 | LHOTIS Y chAY pych #yagy{-Chchych y) amy tyyac ppyaaayal\ V 
(yunoweieg Xvaulpogy) 


et 


THE BATTLE TO UNLOAD IOI 


after rationed out, according to schedule. We had more than 
enough food to see us through, but I foresaw the possibility 
of running short in these items, if reckless use were permitted. 
Although we had fresh meat in plenty, Tennant continued to 
serve both whale and seal meat at the mess, and with some 
the food was popular. Although my own tastes were catholic, 
I confess that the meat of old whale and old Weddell seals 
has a very strong taste against which a sensitive stomach may 
rebel, but the meat of young whale and Crab-eater seal is 
quite good, and not unlike steak. Some of us regarded penguin 
a delicacy. It is a very dark, rich and gamey meat and tastes 
like nothing that we have in civilization, although it did re- 
mind me of the meat of small Auks that are found far North 
in the Arctic. 

To save coal, which was still a pressing concern, we closed 
the refrigerating plant on the City. We simply hung the meat 
on the rigging. It seemed absurd, suddenly, to continue to 
operate a little plant when the world’s largest cold storage 
plant was alongside. 

Sunday, we broke our unloading record—we put seven 
and one-half tons of stuff ashore. 

The following day we received word that the Bolling, 
loaded to the guards with supplies, including 7,500 gallons of 
aviation gasoline, had left Dunedin and was on her way south. 

She was about to undertake a significant experiment. Could 
so small a steel ship, even at this advanced stage of the season, 
safely run the gauntlet of the pack? 


Tuesday 
January 15 
Bay of Whales 


We feel repaid tonight for all the difficulties we have had 
in our gooo mile journey from the United States. Today 
we made seven short flights in the Fairchild, and actually in- 
augurated the programme of discovery. 

I cannot speak too highly of the men. They have worked 
like dogs for the past three days getting the plane ready. The 
crate in which the ship rested was lifted by winch and swung 
thwartship, so that it rested half on the bulwarks and half on 


102 LITTLE AMERICA 


a block of timbers built up on the ice. Then, laboriously, it 
was let down an incline until it rested on the ice. The wings 
were carried down on the shoulders of a dozen men. 

It was hard work, for the weather was quite chilly, and 
it was necessary, while unscrewing bolts and making adjust- 
ments, to work with bare hands. But at last the sides of the 
box fell away, exposing the ship, the wings were bolted into 
place and Demas and Bubier, the mechanics, greased, oiled 
and otherwise anointed the engine. They were ready to start 
the engine at 2 A.M. this morning. 

In the midst of this, a snow storm came up, the bay ice 
began to disintegrate and there was a large possibility that, 
unless we quickly moved the plane to the Barrier, it might be 
swept out to sea on a broken floe. While we were debating 
this move, the sky was swept clear of the snow clouds and 
everything was serene once more. 

A bit of warm oil in the engine, the stimulation of a torch, 
a few whining turns on the inertia-starter—in a moment the 
engine was purring under Balchen’s hand on the throttle. 

Balchen ran the plane up and down on the ice a few yards, 
to test out the skis, and then turned over the controls to 
Parker, to whom had been promised the privilege of making 
the first flight. And because I felt that the mechanics, on whom 
every flight depends to large measure, are too frequently over- 
looked, I let them go as the first passengers. 

Sergeant Roth, of the Army, accompanied Parker on the 
first flight. Smith took Sergeant Bubier, of the Marine Corps, 
and Demas, on the second flight. The ship got off the ice 
each time very fast—in 15 seconds according to my stop-watch. 
Then Balchen and June took off for a slightly longer flight, to 
test radio and flying performance. They reported the plane in 
perfect trim. 

With such fine weather at hand, it seemed a pity not to 
take advantage of it, so I instructed June and Smith to make 
the plane ready for a short flight of exploration. (I forgot to 
mention that Balchen took Owen and Teddy Bayer for a hop 
on the fourth flight. ) 

We took off at 3.45 o’clock. Air clear, visibility about 50 
miles, The few inequalities in the surface of the bay ice 
caused the skis to bang a bit, but the 425 h. p. engine lifted 


THE BATTLE TO UNLOAD 103 


the light load clear with a rush. We were instantly op the 
threshold of the unknown. 

The first glimpse of the rolling Barrier to the south was 
a fascinating one. Snow, snow everywhere, as far as the eye 
could see, save behind, where the blue-green Ross Sea shim- 
mered and glistened in the sun. The City was a toy ship with 
a black toothpick for a mast stuck against a curving crescent 
of flat ice. The orange sides of the house at Little America 
were just visible above the snow. And the trail, a thin, 
irregular line worn by dogs and sledges, twisted across the 
Barrier from the camp to the ship. 

The vagueness wrought by the effect of light on snow 
was quite disturbing. Instead of an horizon there was a curi- 
ous dappled effect. Not an easy line to fly a ship by. 

Within five minutes we were looking down upon areas 
never seen before By man. The rolling slopes of the Barrier . 
had hidden them from the eyes of Amundsen and his men. 

We sighted a new harbor, about three miles deep, on the 
west side of the Bay, not far from Floyd Bennett Harbor. 
Our compasses then, owing to our nearness to the magnetic 
Pole, began to swing badly. This started a flow of reco 3 
tions. It recalled the difficulties that Clarence Chamberlin 
had had with his compasses at the beginning of his flight to 
Germany, and nothing seemed more fitting than to name this 
harbor after him—Chamberlin Harbor. 

We struck out due south, the Barrier below and stretch- 
ing endlessly to the south. Some miles to the left—I hesitate 
to state the distance exactly, owing to the difficulty of judg- 
ing distances from the air—we made out an extensive pressure 
ridge trending across the Barrier. It seemed to be twenty 
miles long, at least. More evidence, then, of the submerged 
land that impedes the northward movement of the Barrier. 

A glance about the cabin showed how crowded we were. 
Smith’s huge frame seemed to fill half the forward part of 
the ship. June sat at the radio, bulking large in his fur suit, 
communicating with the operators on the City. The floor was 
piled high with gear—a hand sledge, sleeping bags, enough 
food to sustain three men for one month, a small primus 
cooker, an emergency, hand-operated radio set. All essential 
precautions in case of a forced landing. But they made it 


104 LITTLE AMERICA 


deucedly cramped in the cabin for an explorer who was try- 
ing to take in everything. 

After flying south for a few miles, we turned to the 
westward and flew approximately 15 miles parallel to and 
south of the Barrier’s edge. Perhaps 30 miles west of Little 
America we observed an inlet running north and south. We 
flew over it and found a beautiful formation in the Barrier. 
The cliffs to the east and west of it at its mouth rose, we 
saw, in vertical whiteness to a height of at least too feet 
from the water. Here, the inlet appeared to be about 1,500 
feet wide. A mile beyond the entrance the bay ice began, and 
from our altitude seemed to be as smooth as a billiard table. 

A few miles beyond the edge of the bay ice the inlet 
narrowed a trifle and bent to the southwest. As we banked, 
the more closely to study the formation, we caught sight of 
hundredse of seals lying alongside a pressure ridge. Our 
engine must have made a fearful racket, for we saw them 
tilt their heads, as if by unanimous agreement, and stare up 
at us. For a moment the bay was alive with black shapes 
scattering and hurrying in every direction, many of which 
ga off the edge of a black lead of open water and dis- 
appeared. But the rest, after seeing that nothing untoward 
happened, lay still and no doubt returned to sleep. At least 
they no longer gave us as much as a glance. 

The inlet curved again to the south and terminated in 
a wedge-shaped formation a few miles farther on. The inlet 
here was filled with great blocks of ice, cracked and broken 
as if some mighty hand had used them as missiles. Far to 
the south the Barrier rose higher and higher, until it appeared 
to reach a height of 200 to 300 feet. 

Just then we made out an unusual cloud formation which 
was so similar to a cloud we had seen on the trans-Atlantic 
flight that I was astonished. At first glance this cloud 
appeared to be high land; and on the Atlantic flight we had had 
a moment of panic when we saw a similar formation, for 
navigational reckoning supposedly placed us in the middle 
of the ocean. 

It was impossible to recall the flights of 1927 without 
thinking of the man who was the first to cross the ocean 


THE BATTLE TO UNLOAD 105 


alone. I marked the position of the inlet on the chart, and 
named it Lindbergh Inlet. 

There was a great temptation on this flight to continue 
on and on, seeking new things. The real joy in explora- 
tion by flights comes from the speed with which discoveries 
come—a new, perhaps greater finding seems always to be 
impending in the advancing horizon. 

But the polar regions are won only by patience. Dis- 
turbed somewhat by the violent oscillations of the compasses 
and deciding that it would be well for the pilots to have 
more experience in dealing with the eerie conditions of visi- 
bility before undertaking a longer flight, I suggested to Smith 
that we turn back. 

Halfway back to the base, the engine stopped dead. Smith 
worked the throttle without effect, and then headed the plane 
in a long glide toward the Barrier. None of us, to say the 
least, anticipated the landing with pleasure. The surface was 
quite rough, and if we cracked up the walk home would be 
a dreary affair. And what a stupid thing, I thought, to 
jeopardize the unloading at this critical period by necessitat- 
ing a rescue. ° 

Smith decided one of the wing tanks had run dry, and 
quickly turned the proper valve. The velocity of the dive 
was sufficient to turn the propeller over, and the motor took 
up its steady, reassuring hum. 

As we approached the bay, I saw that conditions of visi- 
bility were much worse. A drifting haze—sea smoke— 
obscured the surface of the bay, and the shifting light play- 
ing on the snow made it very difficult to judge our altitude. 

Smith, however, very neatly measured his glide with re- 
spect to the water lapping the edge of the bay ice, levelled off 
at just the right moment and landed with scarcely a jar. 

All told, it has been a fairly good day’s work. An air- 
plane has been taken from temperate regions on a long voyage 
through the tropics, assembled, tested and flown in the polar 
region without accident. Twelve hundred square miles of un- 
known areas surveyed within a few hours—it would have taken 
foot travellers weeks to learn the same things. 

I do not altogether agree with some of the authors who 


106 LITTLE AMERICA 


say that aviation can accomplish nothing in the Antarctic. 
I am more than ever encouraged in my belief that it can 
accomplish a great deal. 


Eastward lay a greater, solid reality of discovery. Beyond 
the rocky outposts of King Edward VII Land and the dim 
shapes of the small Alexandra Mountains which Scott had 
seen from the deck of the Discovery, in 1902, before the 
onrush of the ice pack had driven him back, lay thousands 
upon thousands of square miles that no man had ever seen, 
much less trodden. What lay there was perhaps the most 
fascinating geographical enigma yet left unsolved. It held 
the answer to at least half a dozen of the unanswered major 
mysteries of Antarctica. Here was the thing we had come 
to the Antarctic to find—a sight of things denied to man 
since the beginning of time. Both Shackleton and Amundsen 
had later hurled their ships into the massive ice fields guard- 
ing the coast, only to be driven back before the blows of the 
pack. “The forces of these uncontrollable packs are stronger 
than human resolution,” 1 Shackleton said, and that admission 
coming from one of the most resolute men who ever accepted 
Nature’s challenge, is indicative of how fiercely East 
Antarctica guarded its secret. Now we were eager to try 
our luck against it, and were emboldened by the faith we had 
in our vehicle. In the heavens, we were sure, lay the road 
to discovery. I was impatient to show that aircraft could 
succeed where surface craft had failed. 

The next day, Wednesday, January 16th, we flew the 
Fairchild to Little America. I was reluctant to risk its pres- 
ence any longer on the shifting bay ice, which, under the 
warmth of the sun, was beginning to break up. Affairs were 
humming at the base. Two houses were up, a third was 
started and about the place was a suggestion of security and 
coziness. Gould and McKinley had the job well in hand. The 
boxes of supplies were neatly assembled in orderly piles, and 
the exact whereabouts of every item was recorded. Haste 
had not been allowed to destroy efficiency. The dog teams 
were then averaging two round trips per day, carrying from 
700 pounds to 1000 pounds per load. Only a person who knows 

* Shackleton, “The Heart of the Antarctic,” i, p. 81. 


THE BATTLE TO UNLOAD 107 


dogs can appreciate what that means, Knud Rasmussen once 
said, “I bless the fate which allowed me to be born in an 
age when the Arctic dog sledge was not yet out of date.” 
And after seeing them race into Little America, team after 
team, while the drivers fought top-heavy loads which 
threatened constantly to tip over into the snow, I could ex- 
claim with him. Had it not been for the dogs, our attempts 
to conquer the Antarctic by air must have ended in failure. 
On January 17th, Walden’s single team of thirteen dogs 
moved 3,500 pounds of supplies from ship to base, a distance 
of 16 miles each trip, in two journeys. Walden’s team was 
the backbone of our transport. Seeing him rush his heavy 
loads along the trail, outstripping the younger men, it was 
difficult to believe that he was an old man. He was 58 years 
old, but he had the determination and strength of youth. 

Our sledge transport was not at all uniform. In size the 
teams ranged from Walden’s, which was the largest, with 
thirteen dogs, down to four. The weight of the load hauled 
in each sledge varied according to the number of dogs in the 
team. Asa rule the load averaged approximately 150 pounds 
per dog. The following teams, with the following leaders, 
provided the surface transportation during the operation of 
unloading : 


Driver Leader 
Quin Blackburn Holly 
Chris Braathen Moose-Moss-Mouse 
Jack Bursey St. Lunaire 
Frederick E. Crockett Quimbo 
Joe de Ganahl Terror 
Edward E. Goodale Blizzard 
Paul Siple Pete 
George Thorne Tickle 
Norman D. Vaughan Dinny 
Arthur Walden Chinook 


Arthur Berlin alternated with Blackburn and Siple. Of 
these men, Blackburn, Braathen, de Ganahl, Siple, Berlin and 
Thorne had never before driven a dog team. The dogs were 
scarcely more seasoned. Three of the leaders mentioned above 
had never led a team before. 


108 LITTLE AMERICA 


The strain of loading was so great that I had feared the 
dogs could not continue to stand up under it, and therefore 
requested the New York office to send 20 additional dogs. 
These, we were told, would be sent from Alaska under the 
care of Mg. Alan Innes-Taylor, a veteran driver. They were 
expected to arrive at Dunedin in time to catch the Bolling be- 
fore she started her second trip south. 

Because the arrival of the Bolling would compel us to 
throw all efforts into unloading her, I decided to try to 
squeeze in the eastern flight before she appeared. Thursday, 
Balchen and June went over the Fairchild from stem to stern, 
checking structure, engine and radio in preparation for the 
flight. Weather permitting, I intended to take off within 
48 hours. Haines, our weather man, shook his head. “You'll 
be up to your ears in snow,” he told us. 

His prophecy was as good as his word. Friday, the 18th, 
it blew a gale all day long; but in spite of it, dog transport 
never slackened. The teams floundered through the smother 
of drift and deposited seven tons at the base. They had then 
moved more than 100 tons since December 31, without the 
loss of a single package. 

This period was marked for us by two incidents. 

Captain Brown reported by radio that the Bolling was 
laboring in very heavy seas, and taking much water over the 
decks. The night before the sea ran so high he feared he 
would lose his whole deck load. He requested an emergency 
3 A. m. radio schedule with us. Before the hour arrived, 
however, the weather moderated slightly, and he reported 
that the immediate danger was past. 

The second incident, perhaps the saddest during our whole 
stay in the Antarctic, was the loss of Walden’s famous lead 
dog, Chinook. Chinook was Walden’s pride, and there was 
no doubting the fact that he was a great dog. He was old 
when brought to the Antarctic, too old for hard, continuous 
labor, and Walden used him as a kind of “shock troop,” 
throwing him into a team when the going turned very hard. 
Then the gallant heart of the old dog would rise above the 
years and pull with the glorious strength of a three-year-old. 
The affection between him and Walden was a beautiful thing 
to see: one sensed that each knew and understood the other 


| SNIOONAG chochcham ya AHL taya "ayachax t ‘OHM 


ALL IN A Day’s UNLOADIN 


THE BATTLE TO UNLOAD 109 


perfectly, and it was Walden’s rare boast that he never needed 
to give Chinook an order: the dog knew exactly what had to 
be done. A few days after his twelfth birthday, Chinook 
disappeared. We searched the camp for him, without success ; 
in the trampled snow about the ship, it was impossible to find 
his tracks. No doubt he made his way alone. Whether he 
walked out alone to die, because his days of service were 
done, is something I cannot vouch for: this was the romantic 
theory advanced by several of the men. At any rate, his 
body was never found. A clue to his disappearance was 
suggested in the following spring when Davies, during the 
course of a scientific investigation of the crevasses in the 
vicinity of Little America came across the marks of a dog’s 
feet on the shelf of a crevasse, some thirty feet below the 
Barrier surface, about half a mile to the eastward. The traces 
were half covered by falling crystals, but Davies believed that 
the dog had lived there for several days. The walls of the 
crevasse were scored by small furrows, such as might have 
been made by a dog scratching, and some of these reached as 
high as a man’s shoulder. Whether these were made by 
Chinook or another dog, we never learned. All this was a deep 
disappointment to Walden, who wanted to bury Chinook in 
his harness. 

Saturday the storm continued with undiminished strength, 
whipping the snow into the face and numbing the hands. 
Nevertheless the dog drivers pluckily maintained their sched- 
ules. They carried 11% tons of coal, in sacks, to the base, 
which is, I believe, a record of its kind. I watched the 
weather apprehensively, praying for sun. Really cold weather 
would not shut in before April. This fact had a definite 
bearing upon two “ifs” in the flight equation. Jf we could 
make the Eastern flight within the next few days, and if we 
should have a forced landing not more than 200 miles from 
base, we might still be able to walk home without suffering 
undue hardships. 

The impending arrival of the Bolling brought up bother- 
some planning. One thing was certain: We could not unload 
her by the same process by which we were unloading the City, 
and still expect to have her to complete a second round trip 
between Dunedin and Little America. Even ignoring the time 


110 LITTLE AMERICA 


limits set for her stay, it was doubtful whether the dogs and 
men could continue to stand up under the strain of 32 miles 
per day with very heavy loads. | 

The alternative was to force the Bolling to the Barrier’s 
edge, by some determined action, and unload her there. | This 
I hoped to do, if the operation could be accomplished without 
too great a risk. 

Sunday night, shortly after 10:30 o'clock, the weather 
clearing somewhat, we decided to make an investigation of 
the low edge of the Barrier. Some distance south of the 
northern edge of the bay ice, the Barrier sloped to within a 
few feet of the bay level, and a lead, perhaps a mile long, 
had opened between. The ice, however, was still much too 
thick to risk the City in it, so we reconnoitered in a small 
motor boat. With me came Owen, Strom, Paul Siple, the 
Boy Scout, and John Sutton. 

It was still snowing a bit, and the atmosphere was quite 
thick. With the outboard motor arousing a medley of echoes 
in the Barrier cliffs, we cruised along the edge of the bay 
ice, making to the east. Submerged tongues of blue ice 
licked out at the hull and large floes of loose ice floated on 
the wind and tide, making navigation quite exciting. Care- 
fully we steered between them and presently were able to make 
out the Barrier cliffs, smoking in the haze, and the stratifica- 
tion lines of scores of snows which ran through them like 
darker levels. The hacked surface showed where large pieces 
had broken away; and in places undershot cornices hung out 
at dangerous angles, suggesting impermanence. I was re- 
luctant to approach nearer, not knowing when the Barrier 
might greet us with a shower of ice brickbats, and turned 
the boat to the south. We followed a lead for about a mile 
until we were stopped by the wall of thick bay ice. Half a 
mile away the Barrier sloped almost to the level of the bay ice. 
Here it could be approached by an incline formed by drifted 
snow, which had packed hard and rose in a gentle slope to 
the edge of the Barrier. If we could get the Bolling in that 
far, here would be an excellent place to discharge cargo. But 
how to get her in? A cursory examination showed conclu- 
sively that the ice which lay between us was much too hard 


THE BATTLE TO UNLOAD III 


and firmly set to be broken by the charge of either ship. We 
must wait until nature saw fit to move it. 

Just then the motor, which had been kicking up wickedly, 
gave a final splutter and died. Siple and Sutton worked over 
it for some time, without success, and, there being nothing 
else to do, we unlashed the oars and began to row back to 
the ship. This proved so tiresome that we were soon per- 
suaded to give it up, in favor of making further experiments 
with the engine. This time we were successful, and with the 
motor humming attractively, we made for the mouth of the 
lead. 

About the time we gained it some one saw a whale sound 
about a quarter of a mile ahead. I turned in time to see 
half a dozen waterspouts rise in grayish vapor above the 
water, and fall hissing; then a long, white and ebony body 
lunged out of the water and sank in a curving movement. 
Then another, and another, and still another, until I had 
counted about ten. 

There was no mistaking the identity of the ominous, black 
triangular fin; the ugly heads and the sickly yellow patch 
under the jaws. They were Killers. I do not consider my- 
self a particularly imaginative man, nor am I impressed as 
a rule by the legends that accumulate about the habits of 
certain animals. Yet I confess candidly that the sudden 
appearance of these ill-reputed creatures had a disturbing effect : 
and we became most sensitively aware of the flimsy character 
of our boat. 

The others, I am quite sure, drew no enjoyment from 
the situation. 

I was at the tiller at the time, and deciding that discretion 
was the better part of valor, edged the boat toward the bay 
ice, looking for a protruding shelf of firm ice where we 
might land. Meanwhile I kept one eye on the approaching 
whales, whose slow deliberate movements fascinated one as 
a serpent is said to fascinate its victim. Always they drew 
nearer, with a showing of glistening, oily backs. The 
measured progress was intimidating but I was reassured when 
I saw that if they remained on their course they would pass 
astern; but, when fairly close aboard they rapidly changed 


112 LITTLE AMERICA 


course and headed directly for the motor boat. I sincerely 
believed that they had seen us and doubted very much if 
their intentions were good. 

Having no desire to make their acquaintance, in scientific 
observations or otherwise, I hastily looked about for a place 
we might land the ship. The nearest ice edge was 300 yards 
away, and very ragged. At that moment, however, any kind 
of firm ice looked good. It was not necessary to order 
Sutton to open the engine at full speed. We raced for the 
ice, and the Killers, which seemed to be travelling twice as 
fast as the boat, gained rapidly. The thought was in my 
mind that one of them, coming up after a long dive, might 
capsize the tiny boat. Each porpoising lunge brought them 
nearer, and the short dash to the edge of the bay ice took a 
long time. The hull scraped over an undershot tongue of 
ice and banged violently against the edge. I am sure that 
no boat was ever so quickly abandoned as this was. As we 
faced around the Killers came up not more than 15 feet 
from where we stood. Another dive would have brought 
them up with us. We had drawn our revolvers—a foolish 
gesture, I concluded later, for a battery of 75’s would not 
have stopped them if they had meant business. They dived 
underneath the bay ice and we did not see them again. We 
waited quite a while after they disappeared before we put out 
again, and the journey to the ship was completed without 
incident. Serious as it was at the moment, the episode pres- 
ently yielded its lighter side, and by supper time was subject 
for many a good laugh. It was Siple’s unfortunate fate to 
have been appointed assistant to the scientific staff a few 
days before, with the duty of studying animal life in the bay, 
and his introduction to this particular department was the 
cause of much jesting. 

Each day seemed to develop its particular excitement. 
Monday, about noon, a swell came from the north and before 
long had hammered to pieces the ice about the ship. At the 
time seven dog teams, several of them heavily loaded, were 
grouped on the ice near the ship. So rapidly did the ice begin 
to break up it appeared doubtful whether they could be driven 
away in time. Meanwhile the ice on which the dog crates 


THE BATTE" TO UNLOAD 113 


were placed began to crack. Several empty teams were dis- 
patched to retrieve them, the loaded sledges were ordered to 
race for Little America, a radio message was sent to Little 
America to hold up the departure of all teams until the danger 
passed, and a group of men were sent ashore to take up our 
ice anchors, of which we had four out on the ice. These 
operations were directed from deck by megaphone, and were 
executed, it appeared, none too quickly. For the City was in 
the grip of a very powerful swell, and pounding violently on 
sharp ice. The strongest vessel ever made could not endure 
that kind of thing for very long. 

With the ice anchors aboard we steamed to the west, 
hoping to take on the dog crates, only to find the water much 
too rough to risk coming alongside. We then turned east, 
to find that two sledge teams, which had started before our 
message reached the base, were waiting for us near the berth 
we had quit an hour before. By this time, a considerable 
amount of ice had gone out, and finding comparatively smooth 
water to the leeward, we edged in and anchored to the ice 
again. The teams were loaded and hustled off to the base, 
but before the other teams returned, the ice began to drift 
out anew, the City shivered under several nasty wallops, and 
we hastily stood out to sea. 

This time we steamed to the east, entering the lead we had 
explored by small boat the night before, and found haven 
there. The ice was none too thick nearby to suit me, but 
as the position brought us half a mile nearer the base, we 
prepared to make the best of it. 


Bay of Whales 
Wednesday 
January 23 


A dull day. Nothing except the usual unloading opera- 
tions. The City is now practically discharged, and the men 
are allowed to let up a bit, pending the arrival of the Bolling, 
which will mean very hard work for every one. The Bolling 
entered the pack Monday, and is apparently getting through 
without trouble. Splendid. 


114 LITTLE AMERICA 


Bay of Whales 
Thursday 
January 24 


Captain Brown radioed today that there is a possibility 
the Bolling will arrive here the day after tomorrow. We 
simply must find a place where she can unload on low Barrier. 

The ice has turned quite soft, and we have had to seek 
a new berth. The drivers frequently went up to their waists in 
soft snow, and several sledges sank on settling cakes until nearly 
submerged. They were saved after some difficulty. A suddenly 
tilting cake flung Vaughan into the freezing water. He clung 
to a piece of ice until his chum, Goodale, could get him out. 

Altogether, I think we have been fortunate in getting 
through this day without loss of personnel or supplies. 

Melville and Strom made a gallant attempt to force a 
way to the ice foot at the edge of the low Barrier. Our 
position this morning was about a quarter of a mile from 
its edge, and the lead in which we lay having widened slightly, 
to within a few hundred yards of the low Barrier, we deter- 
mined to smash aside what ice iay between. We steamed 
south down the lead, parallel to the Barrier, and from the 
rigging the bay ice at the end was seen to be traversed by 
a number of radiating minor openings, several of which ap- 
peared to lead directly to our objective. 

We directed the City at the most likely looking of them, 
and let her crash into the ice with her utmost force. The 
ice gave only slightly. We backed up the old ship, gave her 
the gun and rammed the ice again, still again, and yet once 
more. We kept at this pounding all day, and with each blow 
the City seemed to roll more wildly, and there was real danger 
of unseating her masts. The man in the crow’s nest, who 
acted as lookout and directed the attack, bore the brunt of it; 
for in his lofty perch each shock was intensified and every roll 
of the ship was lengthened. 

On one occasion we were very nearly caught. An immense 
floe of old ice simply refused to break when we came crash- 
ing down on it: it folded up well aft of the bow, and so 
impetuous was the City’s charge, she rode well into the floe, 
and could not get clear on the recoil, even with the screw 


THe BATTLE TO UNLOAD 115 


turning full speed astern. We put a number of men on the 
ice, and by prodigious work with axes, saws and poles managed 
to set the ship free. 

In the midst of this assault, the dog teams returned from 
Little America. We paused long enough to reload them and 
send them back. Bursey’s team fell through an unseen hole 
in loose ice. He saved his sledge, with its precious load of 
coal, by throwing his body in front of the runners, bracing 
himself precariously between the sledge and the edge of the 
hole. If the weight of the sledge had been greater, Jack, 
dogs and load would probably have been pulled under. Jack 
hung there for some time, nearly exhausted, and his com- 
panion driver, who for some reason believed that he was 
joking, continued on. Fortunately, the lookout stationed on 
the City saw the team go in and sent out a rescue team. 
Bursey was shivering with the cold and could not have held 
on for much longer. For failure to observe the order requir- 
ing that the dog teams remain together on the trail, his com- 
panion driver was removed from dog duty. 

The end of the day’s push found us within a hundred feet 
of low Barrier. A ridge of ice, lifted and distorted by pres- 
sure, at least 25 feet thick, with 15 feet of blue ice below 
water, lay between. We hit this fortress a dozen terrific 
wallops and then gave up. I don’t believe we gained two feet 
at each stroke, although we opened a crack to the pressure 
ridge which might allow it to go out with the tide. It was a 
difficult task trying to wriggle from this position. We dared 
not back out, lest we ruin the propeller on heavy pieces of ice, 
with which the water abounded. We charged, and smashed 
and bore away, over and over again, nibbling a widening circle 
to starboard until at last we had room in which to turn. 

Measured in terms of coal, it has been a costly day. But 
I do not think we have erred. The ice is so cracked, now, 
that a strong blow from the south should very nicely clear 
out what remains. 


Bay of Whales 
Friday 
January 25 


I am anxious to undertake the flight to King Edward VII 


116 LITTLE AMERICA 


Land. The Fairchild is ready, but it would be silly to attempt 
it until the weather man gives the word. 

We further tested the radio today, and Hanson managed 
to “speak” with Fred Meinholtz, chief of the radio staff of the 
New York Times, and the operator at the Mussel Rock Radio 
Station of the Robert Dollar Company, San Francisco. Sig- 
nals were sent out on a wave length of 34 meters. 

Few things are more vexing than waiting on weather. 
Everything for the flight is ready, men, equipment and planes. 
Only good weather is lacking. The Bolling will be here soon; 
and if we don’t get off within the next 48 hours, we shall not 
have another chance to make the flight for some time. 
Anxious as I am to start, I cannot overturn the convictions 
of a life-time. Good weather and visibility are absolutely 
necessary. The decision is in the hands of Haines, who has 
never failed me. 


Bay of Whales 
Saturday 
January 26 


Bolling due tomorrow. 
Haines is optimistic—believes we may undertake the flight 
tomorrow. This is good news. 


CHAPTER VI 
DISCOVERY BY FLIGHT 


Bay of Whales 
Saturday 
January 26, 1929 


Ir has been a real experience, lying here alongside the 
bay ice week after week, with the opportunity of watching 
the changes and caprices of this frozen world. It is not the 
rigid and immobile world that we imagined. All is move- 
ment and change. Day after day, hour after hour, the con- 
tours of the Barrier and bay ice change as fragments break 
off and float northward. The wind, the sea, the sky and the 
visibility change with bewildering swiftness; the penguins 
and the seals are here in large numbers one moment and gone 
the next. I fancy that in Little America it will be the lack 
of change that will be striking. 

But what take my imagination are the regiments of ice 
fields and icebergs that drift past the mouth of the Bay of 
Whales. They come from the mysterious unknown area to 
the eastward. Sometimes these regiments pause at the mouth 
of the Barrier until a northerly wind starts the invincible 
mass in the direction of the City. We watch it carefully, for 
if it should catch and grind us between it and the bay ice, 
the good old City might be crushed into pulp. Several times 
we have had to fight our way through these moving fields 
to the open sea beyond. But these scrimmages have given 
us a chance to observe how varied are the forms of the 
bergs and the pack that come from the land we are so im- 
patient to enter. 


Eastward was mystery, and at 2:53 o'clock, on Sunday 
afternoon, January 27th, we took off in the Fairchild to try 


117 


118 LITTLE AMERICA 


to see with our own eyes what lay there. We had planned 
originally to carry a gross load of 6,000 pounds, but shortly 
before departure reduced this by 300 pounds, to lessen the 
strain on the skis. Balchen was pilot, June the radioman. 
The sky was a cloudless, pervading blue, and the temperature 
a few degrees below freezing. Exactly the kind of a day we 
had wished for. Haines looked up from his charts and with 
ope of his rare smiles said, “We ought to have good weather 
here for at least twelve hours.” What was brewing in the vast 
unknown reaches of ice to the east no magic could fathom; 
for Antarctic weather is a thing of sudden, violent and un- 
predictable changes, which appear to occur contrary to all 
known laws and systems, and more than one meteorologist 
has thrown up his hands in disgust before its caprices. But 
if there is anything in which I have abiding faith, it is in a 
weather prediction by Bill Haines. When he said you may 
go, I knew then that we could go. 

A run of 30 seconds lifted us clear of the snow, and a 
few minutes later Little America had fallen from view 
astern. 

Almost immediately we were gazing down upon untrodden 
areas. To the left we had the curving coastline of the Barrier 
trending north of east: on the right we had the inner spaces 
of the Barrier rolling unbrokenly to the horizon. Visibility was 
about 40 miles. 

Let us pause a moment to glance about the cabin.. In the 
after part of our small cabin crouched June, using a sleeping 
bag as a seat, tinkering with his radio. Balchen was forward, 
at the controls, gradually putting the ship on its course as 
the compass sluggishly settled down. The cabin was so 
crowded with gear I could not stand up. I found myself 
sitting on a primus cooker, in lieu of a seat, while working 
at my charts. 

On the instrument board were the usual instruments— 
bank and turn indicator, altimeter, tachometer, pressure 
gauges, etc. At Balchen’s right was a radio key: in an emer- 
gency, he could also communicate with the base. Fixed on the 
back of his seat was another compass: we had found this to be 


the only position on the plane comparatively free from local 
deviation. 


DISCOVERY BY FEIGHT 119 


In all, we carried 700 pounds of emergency equipment, 
for use in the event of a forced landing. These impedimenta 
fairly filled the cabin to overflowing. There were two hand 
sledges, two sets of man harness, one primus cooker, three 
sleeping bags, I pair of snow shoes, three pairs of skis, 2 
pairs of crampons, 60 feet of alpine rope, an ice axe, spade 
and snow knife, bamboo poles, a tent, a portable emergency 
radio set, an engine repair outfit, two medical kits, a funnel 
for draining oil from the engine, a blow torch and funnel 
for heating the engine, as well as enough food to sustain 
three men over a period of three months. 

A liberal supply of cold weather clothing was provided. 
This included mukluks, with sennagrass, fur mittens, under- 
wear, socks, windproofs and the parkas which we wore. 

There was also my navigational equipment. This included 
several charts (which could be of little value, owing to un- 
known character of the area we proposed to investigate) a 
sextant, drift indicator, a sun compass, earth inductor com- 
pass and a large magnetic compass. It is my practice to 
leave as little as possible to chance. Each of these instru- 
ments could be used the one to check the other. As long as 
the bright sun held, the problem of navigation would be 
comparatively simple: for I could then check the magnetic 
compass with the sun compass and be certain as to my course. 

I laid my course directly for Scott’s Nunatak, which was, 
as we flew, nearly 200 miles away. 

Just before the Bay of Whales disappeared in the lengthen- 
ing perspective, I glanced back, hoping to make out the masts 
of the Bolling against the horizon. But nothing moved on 
the blue waters of the Ross Sea, which glittered like a vast 
tray of diamonds tilted in the sun, except a column of ice bergs, 
deployed like a regiment on the march. 

Twenty minutes out, we sighted a bay in the Barrier to 
the left, and to the right ran a long deep fissure and pressure 
ridge. An interesting discovery. No doubt the Barrier here 
had grounded on land, which opposed the thrust of the ice to 
the sea and maintained the formation of the bay. 

The Barrier edge constantly enticed our eyes from the 
hinterland. Its high, steep cliffs (from our altitude, how- 
ever, they seemed relatively a few inches of beautifully carved 


120 LITTLE AMERICA 


alabaster showing above gray-green water, which lay as softly 
as velvet about their foot) trended to the northeastward with 
few variations in structure; but here and there a large floe 
on the open sea, with edges neatly matching an indentation 
on the Barrier, explained the manner in which the Barrier 
disintegrated and, in a measure, the source of supply of some 
of the bergs that had marched steadily past our berths in the 
Bay of Whales. 

We were flying at 3000 feet, and visibility was excellent. 
Oddly enough, the packs that had beset the ships of Amund- 
sen, Scott and Shackleton, when they attempted to push east- 
ward, were not to be seen. Except for a few scattered frag- 
ments and an occasional iceberg standing in solitary grandeur 
on a blue-green carpet, the Ross Sea was clear and open as far 
as the eye could see. A southern wind had blown the ice 
temporarily to the northward. 

At our altitude a hustling tail wind gave us a splendid 
boost. We averaged well over 120 miles per hour at cruising 
revolutions. 

About an hour after the start of the flight we passed over a 
beautiful bay 1 in the Barrier, the mouth of which was several 
miles wide. A long, curving tongue of ice formed its westward 
side. The bay appeared to be four or five miles deep. From 
our great height it was no more than a modest, rather exquis- 
itely carved indentation in the Barrier. But actually it was 
a stern and rugged thing, with 150-foot ice cliffs, sheer and 
perfect as if cut out by knife, as its walls. Flying does 
deprive an observer of much of the awe that seizes the sur- 
face traveller. I could not help but feel, as we flew over this 
bay, that had we come upon it suddenly from the deck of 
the City, we must have marvelled at its dimensions. But the 
vastly lengthened perspective that the airplane provides sub- 
stitutes a different measurement. With so much to see, the 
things on the earth tend to diminish to their true cosmical 
proportions: and that which lifts itself above the rest and 
impresses must, of necessity, be truly striking. 

Not long after passing the bay, I saw many miles to the 
right a few black peaks protruding from the snow, and be- 
yond them a single peak which invited speculation. On 

" This bay was named Hal Flood Bay. 


DISCOVERY BY ELIGHT I21 


_ consulting the charts used on this flight, I find that I wrote 


in the corner of one of them: “Small peak to the right—land 
may show—looks like it.” I decided to investigate this peak 
later on. 

By this time the Barrier surface on the right had begun 
to rise in a rolling movement of grand dimensions. There 
was land underneath, beyond a doubt. Between our position 
and the coastline the Barrier, on its march down to the sea, 
was riven and cracked until an area at least 20 miles in length 
became a mass of crevasses. These were of a character so 
fearful as to suggest no foot traveller, however stubborn, 
could long exist in them. 

Presently a snow peak lifted its white head dead ahead 
—an inconspicuous mound dancing slightly over the head of 
one of the cylinders. A patch of bare rock showed on the 
northern-side. It was Scott’s Nunatak. Since he first saw 
it in 1902, three men, Lieutenant Prestrud, Johansen and 
Stebberud of Amundsen’s Expedition, had fought their way 
to this lonely spur, in December, 1911. It gave one an odd 
sensation to rush at a rate of two miles per minute toward 
the spot which he and his companions had struggled weeks 
to gain; to be over it and gone in a very few minutes, whereas 
they had lain, shivering and wet, in a tent, beset by snow 
storms, while Prestrud, to pass away the time, conjugated 
Russian verbs. 

From a point a little beyond the Nunatak, we flew over 
land never before seen: and at the given speed of the plane, 
we were exploring snow-covered land to the right at the 
rate of 4,000 square miles per hour. 

To the south of the Nunatak a chain of rather small 
mountains, trending to the southeast, lifted snow-capped peaks 
from the surface. This was the range which Scott named 
Alexandra Mountains. It is doubtful whether any of them 
exceeded 1500 feet in height. I was surprised to observe that 
several of them exposed bare rock on the northern slopes. 
Prestrud, when he observed them from the more modest 
eminence of the Nunatak, reported that “only on the most 


easterly spur was the rock just visible.” 1 


*“The South Pole,” ii, “The Eastern Sledge Journey,” 247. 


122 LITTLE AMERICA 


These few bleak crags were, then, the first real land we 
had seen since we re-discovered Scott Island. 

From the Alexandra Mountains the snow-covered land 
(for land undeniably lay underneath) descended quite rapidly 
to the sea. The slopes were distinguished by well-marked 
terraces, and these in turn were traversed by large numbers 
of crevasses. 

These terraces fell into a slope which met the sea. The 
Ross Sea was solidly frozen over here, for miles to the north, 
and in the pancake smoothness we noted a number of odd- 
looking ice islands, the rounded domes of which were mostly 
split and broken, like tarts which had been toyed with. These 
domes, however, stood at least 100 feet above the general 
level of the sea ice, and their bottoms must have been well 
grounded. We also made out a lone glacier discharging its 
stream of pale blue ice into the sea, and around it, oddly 
enough in this hard frozen waste, lay a pool of open water. 
There were many indications, such as the lack of pressure 
ridges and the smoothness of surface, to show that the sea 
ice here rarely breaks up: and the theory suggested the 
possibility of land to the northward which held it anchored 
in this place. * 

I had envisioned this as a probability, and peered ahead, 
over Balchen’s shoulder. In the gray opacity where ice met 
sky a dark, provocative ribbon held my eyes. Land, I was 
sure, lay there and beyond to the northeast. But before I 
could exclaim, Balchen lifted his hand from the wheel and 
pointed a gloved finger to the east. The whole sector of the 
horizon had disappeared in a thickish haze. We were catch- 
ing up with the storm that had passed over Little America 
the day before. | 

So near a perhaps important discovery, we were not easily 
to be turned aside. We flew on, at a slightly increased rate 
of speed. 

We now could make out the dim outline of snow-covered 
land to the east and south, and presently came to a typical 
Antarctic mountain formation—a mountain entirely snow- 
covered, as round and uninteresting, at first sight, as the 
upper hemisphere of a billiard ball. We approached it at an 
altitude of 3,000 feet, and with some wonderment observed 


DISCOVERY BY FLIGHT 123 


that a hollow depression, perhaps a channel, appeared to 
separate this peak from King Edward VII Land. Whether 
' this channel was at sea level was, of course, impossible to 
determine. 

Behind this peak lay a slightly uplifted, island-like forma- 
tion, and between them ran a second channel. We examined 
this channel as carefully as we could, and though little could 
be judged by the naked eye, we were certain of at least one 
point: the ice to the north of the formation was sea ice. 

Further inquiry was halted by the onrush of snow squalls. 
Actually, our rush of speed carried us into them; but the 
lack of things rapidly sliding past which we associate with 
motion gives the aerial traveller rather the impression of 
things advancing upon him. We saw long fingers of gray 
shadows stretch and feather along the snow; here and there 
a darker shadow blotted out the surface, and its restless, rapid 
rotations identified it as a “yshte” The atmosphere about 
us thickened, the horizon was swallowed up in a gray in- 
definiteness and the impression we had at the moment was like 
nothing so much as flying in a bowl of milk. How very 
easy, I thought, for a careless or intimidated pilot to fly his 
plane straight down into the snow. There was no point on 
which to pin the nose of the plane for steady, level flight. 
Only a milky, trembling nothingness. 

Balchen, undisturbed, attended to the minor oscillations 
of instrument fingers and from them evoked a true flight 
path. He dodged between several squalls, and, finding clear 
sky to the north, swung out over the Ross Sea. A3 we 
turned, we saw the sun, a red disc glowing in a rising murk. 

We were reluctant to leave this fascinating area, for ten 
minutes more of flying, I believed, would have shown whether 
or not King Edward VII Land was an island cut off from 
the land to the eastward, as the conditions seemed to imply, 
or even a peninsula. There was no alternative, and we were 
compelled to turn back. So again this area had guarded 
its secrets—had added us to the long list of those whom it 
had turned back from its frontier’s north, east and west. 

We flew well over the frozen surface of Ross Sea, notic- 
ing a number of rather large ice islands. Visibility to the 
south seemed to be good, so I asked Balchen to steer in that 


124 LITTLE AMERICA 


direction. We set our course toward the first small peak we 
had seen on the way to Scott’s Nunatak. 

The air turned very bumpy. One shock caused us to 
drop for 600 feet, and the gear in the plane was wildly tossed 
about when the wing met a rising column ob ap. . ga3 
quite like meeting a solid obstacle. 

June handed me a slip of paper. It was a message from 
the operator at Little America. “Bolling sighted.” Receiving 
this encouraging news at this time, nearly a mile high above 
and in the midst of this unknown area was one of the most 
exciting incidents of the flight. 

Balchen suddenly turned and beckoned to me to come 
forward. I looked out over the nose of the ship, through 
the shimmering play of the propeller. Far ahead, but perfectly 
distinct, was a splendid mountain peak, with the slate gray 
of bare rock showing. Then as we advanced a second peak, 
then a third, and more lifted their summit above the southern 
horizon until we had counted fourteen. 

This was our first important discovery. I had never seen 
Balchen so delighted. His splendid face was one long smile. 

I could not help but think, as we approached them, what 
an immense advantage the airplane gives the modern explorer. 
Prestrud’s sledges passed within a few miles of this range, 
yet in the restricted visibility had failed to see them. 

We approached the mountains at an altitude of 4,000 feet. 
Here was no jammed-up, continuous range, but rather a 
group of highly individualistic mountains, solitary and stern, 
many of them with patches of gray rock showing on their 
northern profiles, their spurs and crags clothed in snow. They 
lay in the shape of a crescent, and the northernmost peak we 
judged to be approximately 50 miles from Scott’s Nunatak, 
in a west by south direction. We were impressed by the 
surprisingly large amount of bare rock exposed, in contrast 
with the Nunatak and the Alexandra Mountains. As we drew 
nearer, the gray overtone of the rock was modified, and some 
of it had an interesting brown and black coloration. I knew 
then that when he learned about this discovery, our geologist, 
Dr. Gould, would insist upon flying to these mountains 
to make a special investigation of their structure. 


DISCOVERY? BY*FEIGHT 125 


Anticipating, as I was, the making of a preliminary aerial 
reconnaissance of the range, I was quite disappointed when 
' Balchen handed me a note saying that fuel was running low, 
and suggesting we return to the base. We could not afford to 
extend our journey: in flight, gasoline allows of no com- 
promise; so we pointed the nose of the plane for Little 
America, and raced home. 

For a long time the peaks of this range danced across my 
vision, gradually growing smaller while the bare rock dimin- 
ished to mere pin points, and I found myself wondering what 
we should name it. The names of several of the men who 
had befriended the expedition came to my mind; and fore- 
most among these was that of John D. Rockefeller, Jr. And 
it occurred to me that his true inner life is as little known as 
these peaks which we had just seen. His character is in 
keeping with that of these austere mountain masses. He 
stands, steady as a rock, in the chaos of life, and the great 
power he controls is directed wisely and unselfishly for the 
betterment of the world. 

I could do no better than to name this range after him 
—Rockefeller Mountains. 

To two of the peaks I decided to give the names of two 
of the most loyal men I have ever known. One of these is 
“Chips” Gould, carpenter on both polar expeditions. It can 
be said of him that when there is anything to be done he 
never stops working during his waking hours. The other 
is George Tennant, the cook, also a veteran of both polar 
expeditions. I have never forgotten that he offered his 
meager pay, on the completion of the North Pole expedition, 
to help pay our deficit. 

My musings were interrupted by June, with the news that 
the Bolling had come alongside the City and was now tied 
up to her. Another river crossed. And a larger task—the 
unloading—to face. 

We drew within sight of Little America about eight 
o'clock, and from our lofty platform saw the two vessels, 
tiny and still, moored to the bay ice. I noted with pleasure 
that even during our short absence some of the ice had gone 
out. 


126 LITTLE AMERICA 


Down below I saw a dog team making its way across the 
Barrier, and I recognized it as the team which I had asked 
Strom, Braathen and Erickson to take out in search of an 
easier and safer trail between the low Barrier and the base, 
which they were to mark with flags. 

The scene, as we spiralled down, was one of wondrous 
beauty. An unbroken stillness, save for the hum of the 
propeller. The Barrier cliffs and slopes diffused the most 
exquisite colors, which changed and shifted as we watched. 
The lofty arch of sky was a clear blue, with friezes of 
perfectly stationary cloudlets, some rose, some mauve. A 
few icebergs glittered on a sea washed with gold; and in the 
west a range of the most beautiful mountains I have ever 
seen lifted purple peaks in tantalizing mirage. 

A trembling, impermanent delicacy had taken full posses- 
sion of this rugged immensity of ice. How still, how 
lovely, how perfect! One could understand, after this, why 
Scott, Mawson and Shackleton returned to this continent. 
The shock of the skis on the snow was an alien note snapping 
the thread on which the spell hung suspended. 


Now we hustled. Nature, after begrudging us our needs 
so long, relented a trifle, and during the flight sped out 
the ice between the ships and the low Barrier until only a 
few feet of ice remained. Our hours of ramming with the 
City had not been wasted. Captain Brown brought the 
Bolling into action, and with the aid of her sharp steel prow 
and superior horsepower she attacked the remaining ice and 
sheered off 150 yards of it. This gave us a fine pier on the 
ice foot about 50 feet from the Barrier. Directly opposite, 
the Barrier descended in an easy slope to the ice foot, and 
near its northern end the snow was firm enough, and the 
incline sufficiently easy, to justify hauling stores up to the 
Barrier by means of a block and tackle which could be 
operated by the Bolling’s winch. To the right and left the 
Barrier rose steeply to heights of 60 feet or more. This 
place was exactly suited to our needs. We were then only 


five miles by trail from Little America. Unloading opega- 
tions were resumed at once, 


DISCOVERY BY FLIGHT 127 


Monday 
January 28th, 
Bay of Whales 


Things are humming once more. We have a block and 
tackle rigged up, and this is hauling stuff up to the Barrier 
at the rate of two or three sledge loads every half hour. As 
they arrive, the sledges are towed a safe distance back from 
the Barrier edge, and the loads dumped, to await the arrival 
of the dog teams. If we can continue at this speed, we shall 
have the Bolling unloaded within five days. But for the life 
of me, I cannot see how she can accomplish a second round 
trip, unless we get exceptional breaks. 

I am slightly concerned as to the permanence of this ice 
foot to which we are anchored. I examined it very carefully, 
and am most certainly of the opinion it will break up soon. 
I was apprehensive enough to order all hands to remove to 
the Barrier the materials deposited on the ice foot. Among 
these was the heavy crate containing the two outboard engines 
of the Ford. 

Captain Brown must have had a real battle in the ice. 
He says that when the Bolling bucked the pack her sides 
vibrated and bent as the ice closed in. It is a wonder 
he did not lose a couple of plates. I like the way 
Brown does things. He may be given to taking long chances, 
but I feel that he can be trusted to get through, no matter 
what the difficulties. At any rate, he will get through or bust 
—but just at this time we don’t want anything to bust, 
especially the Bolling. 


Tuesday 
January 29, I929 


It happened, after all. This morning, at 9:30 o'clock, 
the ice foot to which we were moored broke without warn- 
ing, and some of us are lucky to be here tonight. 

We were not caught unprepared, however. Last night, 
in the midst of unloading, a squall blew in from the northwest, 
forcing us to call a halt. We rode out the storm, though 


m 


128 LITTLE AMERICA 


not without misgivings, for constantly we heard the reverb- 
erating, long-sustained echoes of the Barrier crumpling to the 
west and north, and the sharper, more piercing reports of 
splitting bay ice. 

Toward morning, the wind abated and shifted to the 
south. The temperature fell to several degrees below freez- 
ing. The blow filled the Bay with loose, broken pieces 
of ice. A vast amount of destruction had been wrought 
somewhere, to cause this. 

We resumed our unloading at once. The one change in 
our surroundings was the discovery of a widening crack near 
the Barrier’s edge, and this, while seemingly not cause for 
alarm, caused us to proceed with greater care and to work 
as fast as possible. Among other things on the ice foot were 
part of the structure of the main house and the center section 
of the Ford wing, which had just been put ashore. The 
Fokker had just been hauled up the slope. 

A number of men were working on the ice foot. Bubier 
and Balchen had just started up the slope, with Goodale 
behind them, and June and Demas were working on the ice. 
Suddenly Demas noticed a crack appear in the ice literally 
between boots, and before he could get the words, ‘“The ice 
is breaking,” out of his mouth, the crack was several feet wide. 

How things flew then! 

The crisis came in an awful silence. The silence was the 
most striking thing about it. Without so much as a groan, 
our dock split open near the Barrier’s edge and then the 
whole area rose and swayed and disintegrated before our 
eyes. Then Goodale fled racing down the slope, yelling at 
the top of his lungs. 

The entire slope fell like an avalanche into the sea. It 
tore out part of the Barrier, and the ice foot broke into 
three huge pieces, riven by cracks that ran parallel to the 
Barrier. 

That portion which was nearest us rose under terrific 
pressure until it seemed it must reverse itself and fall against 
the ships. Brown’s whistle piped shrilly, and all hands were 
ordered to don life belts and shift the lines holding the 
Bolling to the Barrier. When this strain was relieved, the 
ice settled back into the water, and the immediate danger 


"'YaXOLOChOMOYYaCh NI 3oagy aYASSaYgG nul "HOI Avg AHL NO myYChI, 204 


DISCOVERY, BY FLIGHT 129 


passed. The center section of the Ford lay on the broken 
fragment, nearest the Barrier, and this floe was tilting 
more and more as the crack between it and the ice nearest 
the ship widened gradually. I have never seen men 
work so fast. They planked the gap between the ice blocks 
with the sides of airplane crates, which had been broken 
open, and managed to haul the center section to the ice block 
nearest the ship just before the first ice block tilted at an 
angle that must have dumped it into the sea. It was a close 
call. 

Meanwhile another floe, on which rested cargo quite as 
valuable, began to tilt, ever so slowly, and the up-ended edge 
hid the boxes from view. 

Men were rushed out to retrieve them. 

The tumult gradually subsided, all the gear and the houses 
were saved and it is difficult to realize that our only loss was 
a sack of coal and a few crates. 

We're back alongside the Barrier now, slightly to the 
south of the old position, still unloading. The Barrier here 
rises as high as the Bolling’s bridge, and as we rise and fall 
on the slight swell, the Bolling’s superstructure occasionally 
chips off a small piece. 

Our position is far from being a safe one, but where else 
can we go? 

We are racing to get the fuselage of the Ford unloaded. 
A block and tackle has been rigged, and stuff is going ashore 
at a furious rate. As the supplies accumulate we are moving 
them about 100 yards inland from the Barrier’s edge, where 
the dog teams can pick them up later. We are simultaneously 
discharging from the Bolling to the City. 

I do not care to have the Bolling remain in these danger- 
ous waters any longer than is absolutely necessary. 

The bay is simply full of broken pack and small bergs. 


We continued to work the 24 hours around, using two 
shifts. Balchen taxied the Fokker plane to the base. We 
then had two planes safely at Little America. With consider- 
able difficulty we landed one of the Ford wing tips. Wednes- 
day, January 30th, we had two block and tackles operating, 
which greatly simplified our problem. 


130 LITTLE AMERICA 


We worked feverishly for fear the Barrier might let drop 
another berg. I issued rigid orders to the men that every man 
working near the overhang where we lay should wear a life 
line. The fear did not leave me, even after a day and night of 
security. 

Wednesday night, about seven o'clock, shortly after sup- 
per, I was in conference with McGuinness in my cabin. Sud- 
denly I felt a jar, followed by a succession of terrific shocks 
and then a tremendous explosion. It had happened after 
all. The Barrier had broken. We had taken the necessary 
chance and lost. Was the Bolling sunk? For a moment my 
heart stood still and my brain raced with self-condemnation. 
Ships and men lost. The City heeled sharply to port—so 
sharply I thought she must capsize. As I flung the cabin door 
open I saw the Bolling heeling in the opposite direction to 
starboard. I was sure, for a moment, she was capsizing, for 
I saw her keel and she was still leaning. No words can fit the 
horror of that moment. At such a time the mind sees a long 
story in an instant. 

But as I watched, the Bolling reached the peak of her heel- 
ing movement, standing almost on her beam’s end, and then 
swung back. At the critical moment the lines from the City 
maintained the balance and offset the overbalance of the 
masses of ice and snow on her decks. 

As the Bolling rolled back to port, Captain Brown, who 
had been on the City, made a flying leap from the rail to his 
bridge. It was a very daring leap, but no more than one 
could expect from Brown. His own ship was his place in the 
crisis. Tons of snow lay on the starboard deck and gave the 
Bolling a heavy list. 

Huge blocks of the Barrier floated in the water, which 
was still boiling from their impact, rivulets of ice were still 
streaming down the face of the cliffs, and falling, with a hiss- 
ing noise, into the sea. The break, then, had come at a point 
where the Barrier attained a height of about twenty-five feet, 
and very near the point where we had landed the Ford fuse- 
lage a few hours before. 

Only part of the iceberg, I noted, had fallen directly 
upon the Bolling’s deck. She had escaped the main stream of 
the avalanche by a few feet. Thousands of tons had fallen, 


OPOC MEP BY PLIGHT 131 


enough to obliterate her. An iceberg had been born almost on 
‚ her deck. 

High up on the Barrier was a man clinging to a thread of 
rope, his feet dangling helplessly in empty space. I recognized 
him as Harrison. And in the water, clutching a small piece 
of floe, which was menaced by the newlyborn icebergs, was 
another man. It was Benny Roth who, I knew, could not 
swim. He had grabbed a piece of ice and was holding on to 
it for dear life, but it was round and slippery and he could 
not get a firm hold; it spun continually in his hands. 

Were there any others in the water? No one knew. Both 
Melville and Brown had already begun to put the first boats 
overboard. While men on the City and Bolling set out after 
Roth, several men who had been working on the Barrier, 
notably Dr. Coman, Davies, Frank McPherson, E. J. Thawley, 
and Boehning set out after Harrison, who was clinging to a 
slippery line with bare hands. It did not seem possible that 
Roth could be saved. The disturbance was rapidly sweeping 
him sternward and I did not believe he could possibly hold on 
much longer. When the first boat was lowered, too many men 
jumped in it. Hanson, who was in the bow, made a very 
heroic and quick-witted move. Realizing that the boat was in 
danger of capsizing, he dropped overboard, in the chilling 
water, and begged the others to start out at once after Roth. 

Roth by then was near the end of his strength. He had 
meanwhile grabbed a second small cake of ice, and had one 
under each arm. But his head would go under every now 
and then, as his numbed hands slipped and his heavy clothes, 
which had frozen hard, dragged him down. He called out 
that he could not hold on much longer, but he remained very 
calm. 

De Ganahl came paddling past the City, astride a plank, 
which had carried down with the avalanche from the Barrier. 
He had seized it when it floated past the Bolling and was pad- 
dling fiercely in the direction of Roth, through the debris. 
When the life boat beat him to Roth, he scrambled aboard a 
sluggishly moving floe, sat down, carefully removed his shoes, 
and with arms folded about his knees, calmly watched the 
rescue. 


(4 
132 LITTLE AMERICA 


Were any other men still in the water? Lofgren was 
assigned to call the roll and as man after man was accounted 
for, it was an indescribable relief. I am sure I was the happi- 
est man in the world at that moment. 

Harrison’s rescue was accomplished when Coman, with 
real coolness, dropped a looped rope to him, in which he could 
put his foot and so relieve the strain on his hands. Then 
Thawley, with a line tied to his ankles, which the others held, 
crawled out on the overhang, into which Harrison’s line had 
cut several feet, so that he could not be pulled up, reached 

• down, secured a firm hold on Harrison’s wrist and lifted him, 
E unhurt and unruffled, to the top. 

The whole incident took no more than twenty minutes, but 
it seemed hours. 

When the second party came aboard I ordered the ships 
to tie up to each other, and we discharged the Bolling directly 
into the City. It was a very fortunate thing that the unload- 
ing was nearly accomplished when the break came. I would 
never again tempt fate by trying to unload on the Barrier. 

_ We moored at our old berth on the bay ice. 

Saturday, February 2, we finished unloading the last of the 
Bolling’s 440 tons of supplies into the City, while the City dis- 
charged more slowly on the bay ice. The same day, the 
Bolling put out for New Zealand, with the U. S. Mail Flag 
flying from her mast, carrying the first mail from an Ameri- 
can colony in Antarctica. She went with our most sincere, 
but none too confident, hopes of seeing her again, with the 
last of our supplies, before the end of the month. 

Bitter days followed. 

With twenty-seven dogs hauling, we managed to move the 
Ford fuselage to Little America. Seven more dogs carried 
in the radio transmitter, which weighed about 1,000 pounds. 
And another group, using two teams hitched to a sledge, trans- 
ported the second wing tip. We had the polar plane at the 
base at last. 

Sunday, February 3, a severe wind from the north and a 
heavy swell which set the immense ice cakes clashing and 
‚3y m 

M y astern, a very risky maneuver, as 


on 


DIS€OVERY BY FLIGHT 133 


it exposed the propeller to contact with ice. The whole ice- 
littered surface near the edge of the bay ice was then in the 
throes of tempestuous motion, and the friction of many pieces 
of ice made an ominous noise. Time and time again, large 
cakes of ice, lifted by the swell, smashed down upon the pro- 
peller, and the wheel spun with such force that three men could 
not hold it still. We finally broke into clear water, and spent 
the night cruising at sea, with the engines at full speed to 
prevent us from being hurled back by the gale on to the 
Barrier. Many times I wished for greater power and 
speed. 

Next day we berthed again on the bay ice, and resumed 
unloading. 


Wednesday 
February 6 
Bay of Whales 


Two large fields of ice, at least ten feet thick, drifted down 
upon us last night. I was up most of the night, on guard lest 
they threaten to catch our rudder and smash it. The rudder. 
has taken a terrific pounding. It is a good thing that we had the 
foresight to put in a massive rudder before we left the United 
States, but for all its great strength I am not eager to expose 
it more than necessary. This morning, a small berg drove 
toward us, and we had to abandon our berth. The wind was 
so strong it took us three hours to come alongside the bay ice 
again, E 

This is indeed a place of chastisement. And of change. 

A visit to the base was encouraging, but I am afraid that 
I did not make myself popular. Work had progressed amaz- 
ingly well under Gould’s direction, and my sole objection was 
that the foundation for the Administration Building had been 
dug quite near the edge of the Barrier and smack against the 
mess hall, which is already up, and is only too yards from the 
rim. I have no desire to place any building nearer than that. 
The houses must be separated because of the fire hazard. 

It may very well be that this is undue caution, yet I did 
not feel like surrendering my convictions. Consequently, it 


134 LITTLE AMERICA 


will be necessary for the men to dig a new foundation 200 
yards inland. Not a very pleasant job. 

The performance of the snowmobile is gratifying. Arnold 
Clark is doing a good job with it. It is nothing more than 
a Ford chassis, fitted with skis in front and double cater- 
pillar treads behind. It has attained a speed as high as 25 
miles per hour on the smooth Barrier surface, and, in hauling 
loads from the Barrier cache to the base, has equalled the work 
of five or six dog teams. I wish we had another. 

We shall have a very snug camp this winter. Gould and 
McKinley have made the most of the material. 


Thursday, after supper, the menacing movements of a 
large iceberg, that was propelled by a strong wind, expelled 
us hastily from our berth, and we passed the night drifting 
about the Bay. We returned, early the next morning, to re- 
new the discharging of cargo, but the wind stiffened nearly 
to gale force and we had to desist, although we remained 
anchored to the bay ice until late in the evening. By that time 
our situation had become so precarious, we had to depart 
quickly, losing two ice anchors. 

The weather turned very thick, and the wind being from 
the east, we hugged the eastern cliffs of the Barrier, in search 
of lee. We were unpleasantly close, and could hear the seas 
crashing against the cliffs. 

The wind blew with increasing force, and it required the 
full horsepower of the City to keep her head into it. Four or 
five times we were thrown into a mass of drift ice which had 
piled up against other masses of bay ice; and the pounding to 
which the wooden sides of the vessel was subjected seemed 
more than any ship could endure. As we struggled to get 
clear, the consolidated masses rose and fell with the waves, 
grinding against the City and testing her sides severely. We 
finaily fought our way to the mouth of the Bay. Visibility 
was reduced to about twenty yards, and for a moment we 
were uncertain as to our position. We made a slow and cau- 
tious easting, until we saw the Barrier cliffs dimly through 
the driving snow; and by means of these occasional glimpses 


and the smashing of the waves, Melville and Strom guided 
the ship during the night. 


DISCOVERY BY FLIGHT 135 


Saturday 
February 9 
Bay of Whales 


Sea quieting today. 

We are cruising alongside the bay ice, seeking smooth 
water for landing. Time is precious. 

A short time ago a vast explosion came from the Barrier— 
like the sound of big guns firing. More of the Barrier has 
apparently disintegrated. 

City jogging along under jib, staysails and spanker. 

Last night was a tough night for amateur sailors: It was 
bitterly cold. The crash of ice against the vessel—the rumbling 
of disintegrating Barrier and the soupy mixture of fog and 
snow were a disconcerting experience. 

Several times we nearly collided with Barrier cliffs, but we 
came about smartly, with rattling stays and flapping canvas. 

What makes waiting hard is that we could complete the 
unloading if given forty-eight hours of good weather. 


Sunday 
February TO 
Bay of Whales 


Managed to tie up to the bay ice today after spending an- 
other night at sea in storm. The dog teams started out with 
loads after supper. The weather is very thick, snow soft, and 
the pulling very difficult. The dogs were up to their bellies in 
snow. 

Gould, in a radio from the base, reported the weather quite 
bad there and urged the departure of the teams be postponed. 
But we cannot afford to continue to postpone unloading, even 
if the weather is not all that we might wish for. 


Monday 
February tt 
Bay of Whales 


More dirty weather. Soon after the dog teams put out, 
the sea roughened and drove heavy fragments of bergs 
against the ship. We had to put out to sea again. Drove into 


136 LITTLE AMERICA 


the bay ice again this morning, and radioed Gould to send out 
the dog teams. He reported conditions were bad at the base. 
At 9:30 p.m. the sea is calming, and arrival of the dog 
teams is promised in the morning. 
Such delays are distressing. 


Tuesday 
February 12 
Bay of Whales 


The teams arrived, as promised, but a shift of the wind 
to the north, which repeatedly jarred the City against the 
ice, forced us to dump our load on the bay ice and make for 
the open sea. In turning at full speed, the stern sheets came 
within a few feet of the ice—quite the closest shave we have 
yet had. 

The continuous, strong northeasterly winds have so choked 
the mouth of the bay with pack that no safety can be 
found there. As any increase in wind would have driven this 
mass straight down on us, we dodged our way through it and 
stood for the Ross Sea. 

All day long we have been under steam and sail, dodging 
ice and trying to prevent the wind from blowing us far to 
leeward. As it is, our strongest efforts seem pitiful: we have 
drifted at least eight miles and more likely ten, through a 
narrow lane of water between two packs. 

There seem to be no signs of let-up in this storm. The 
barometer is rising slightly, but that does not necessarily mean 
anything down here. 


Wednesday 
February 13 
At Sea 


The storm seems to be over at last. The sun shone this 
morning, the wind has shifted to the southeast, and though 
the sky is overcast a line of blue can be seen in the southern 
horizon. 

We punched a hole through the pack defending the en- 
trance to the bay, and made for our old berth. It was so 
cluttered up with bergs and drift that we could not tie up. 


DISCOVERY BY FLIGHT 137 


Piles of this stuff were rafted tightly against the bay ice from 
the east to the west walls of the Barrier. 

It was then decided to attempt to make a trip to King 
Edward VII Land. 

We are now in an extensive field of loose, but heavy, 
floes, and about 20 miles northeast of the Bay of Whales. 
Under sail and steam combined, we are making about 5 
knots—a merry gait for the old City. 

First signs of winter darkness tonight—a faint darken- 
ing in the southern sky. 

The sea is full of bergs, of various sizes. One mighty 
fellow was at least a mile long, and 4o feet high. 


Thursday 
February 14 
Bay of Whales 


This eastern sortie came to a quick end about five o’clock 
this morning. An impenetrable pack was sighted dead ahead, 
stretching from the Barrier to the north as far as we could 
see. 

I gave orders to steam northward, in search of a passage, 
but the solid front of the pack remained unbroken. At six 
o'clock, no way through having been found, it was decided to 
return. There was little to gain by continuing, and much to 
lose if we became trapped in the ice. 

We took soundings on the way back. 

Returning to the Bay, we found a fairly good berth 
slightly to the west of the old one. A radio summons brought 
out the teams, and a heavy load was sent to the base. 

Our own difficulties in the Bay of Whales were not the 
only ones that troubled the expedition. On the way back, the 
Bolling ran into frightful weather. A radio from Captain 
Brown on the 11th disclosed she was running before a wind 
of Force 8—a wind of hurricane force, and listing 56°. The 
chart house, he reported, was awash at times, and there were 
moments when he thought the ship would capsize, as she 
carried very little ballast. But she defeated the gale, and on 
the 15th reached Dunedin, having taken four days to make 
the last 150 miles. 


138 LITTLE AMERICA 


On the same day, the Fokker completed three successful 
trials. Our unloading was nearly done, and the situation was 
sufficiently promising to cause me to attempt a second flight 
to the east, in an effort to reach the land from which we were 
turned back twice by sea and once by air. Accordingly I gave 
orders that the two planes, the Fokker and the Fairchild, be 
checked and made ready for a seven-hour flight. 

Sunday, the 17th, I went into Little America by dog team. 
The sun was swinging low in the west, and the whole sky 
was a pool of gold. In a rainbow arc there trembled a number 
of mock suns. The richness of the radiance fell in a golden 
torrent on the Barrier, rendering a scene of ineffable beauty. 
A gorgeous setting for a flight of discovery. However, be- 
fore we reached the base, the sky turned misty and the air be- 
came full of snow crystals. On Haines’ advice, the take-off 
was postponed. 


CHAPTER VII
DISCOVERY OF A NEW LAND TO THE EASTWARD


Botn planes, the Fokker and Fairchild, took off on Mop- 
day, February 18. The Fokker was off first, and the Fairchild 
took and held a position about twenty yards astern. In the 
Fokker with me were Balchen, as pilot, and Berkner, as radio 
operator. Parker and June comprised the crew of the Fair- 
child. The temperature was 14° above zero," and we were 
warmly dressed. We laid our course for Scott’s Nunatak, 
as before. 

We flew high, the engine at cruising revolutions. The 
Ross Sea now lifted a face marked by infinite desolation. Its 
surface for miles was littered with grayish patches of pack, 
sometimes consolidated, sometimes scattered, and through its 
interstices the water cut dark and irregular patterns. It sug- 
gested a mosaic laid by a madman. 

It was apparent that while we strove to find a passage with 
the City the pack had disassembled somewhat, and a bold 
assault might now carry its outworks. At any rate, I decided 
to make the attempt on return. 

To the north a dark water sky, of decidedly threatening 
appearance, indicated the Ross Sea was open. The extensive- 
ness of this darkness appeared to influence the horizon ahead, 
for, as we advanced toward it, the cloud sheet was suffused 
with a uniform, milky gray color, utterly lacking in shadows. 
The horizon slowly disappeared, and the ridges and depressions 
in the Barrier, never too distinct from the air, were blotted 
from view. Again, we had the sensation of flying in a bowl 
of milk. Nevertheless, we pressed on, hoping that conditions 
would improve. 

Just before we sighted Hal Flood Bay (we had then been 

* All Temperatures are recorded in Fahrenheit. 
139 


140 LITTLE AMERICA 


flying about an hour), the sky ahead was swallowed by a mass 
of heavy, low hung clouds, which stretched directly across our 
path. These were definitely snow clouds, and probably meant 
a storm was raging over the very areas we hoped to reach. 

. We rose steadily and surmounted the first layer of cloud, 
but above these there was no improvement. A still higher 
mass lay ahead. 

I conferred hastily with Balchen, and we were agreed that 
to continue to the east would be not only very hazardous but 
unprofitable. We could see nothing. We therefore changed 
course to the southeast. 

This change of direction soon brought us past the Rocke- 
fellers, and we swung by them ten or fifteen miles to the west- 
ward, at a height of about 4,000 feet. I saw now, as we tra- 
versed them, that the mountains were more extensive than 
they had at first appeared, and began to count them until the 
profusion of peaks rendered the task confusing. I judged, 
however, there must be at least twenty-five mountain peaks in 
the group, most of which showed patches of bare rock. 

The highest eminence did not appear greatly to exceed 
2,000 feet above sea level, and the lowest perhaps not more than 
500 feet. The great ice sheet had folded over them, burying 
all but the highest peaks and filling the valleys to overflowing. 
Deep depressions had been smoothed out until they seemed to 
be no more than shallow basins. It was a scene of extraordi- 
nary beauty and simplicity. One could not resist the im- 
pression that the peaks were struggling to lift their heads 
above the eternal snows. And over a span of centuries, the 
same struggle had been going on: the warfare between the 
earth’s crust fighting to keep itself clear and the forces of the 
ice age which would engulf it. 

Wherever we glanced, the peaks and ridges were deeply 
covered with snow, except for the patches of nearly vertical 
rock on which the snow, owing to the vigorous eddies and 
currents of wind which played about the mountains, could not 
gain foothold. And always at the base of each mountain, to 
the leeward of the prevailing wind, the currents had built up 
a long mound of snow, perhaps 100 feet wide, which gave it a 
wonderful stream-line effect. The valleys appeared to be a 
mixture of ice and snow, which so softened and masked their 


NEW LAND TO THE EASTWARD 141 


outlines as to rob them of striking character. Blue glints in 
the ice near the lower mountain slopes caught the eye, which 
led me to believe that the foothills approaching the mountain 
masses were largely encased in ice, no doubt the result of 
summer melting. These frozen pools, of striking blue, stood 
out quite distinctly from the white that surrounded them. 

Such melting, even on a continent where the temperature 
only rarely rises above freezing, is not uncommon in the 
vicinity of mountains. All explorers in the Antarctic have re- 
ported similar phenomena. It is due, of course, to the fact that 
the dark faces of the rocks catch and hold the sun’s heat, and, 
radiating it, melt the adjoining snow which, on passing out of 
its influence as water, cools rapidly and forms ice. 

We searched in vain for evidences of wide movement in 
the snow and ice about these mountains, Save for a small 
area to the eastward, where we passed over a minor plateau 
which was crevassed and irregular in spots, the Barrier rolled 
about their feet unbrokenly. This, then, is an area of slight 
change. 

With the Rockefellers thus spread out before us, I sud- 
denly remembered my debt to Captain Nilsen. I picked out a 
prominent peak, marked its position on my chart, and scribbled 
a message for June: “Have just passed Mt. Nilsen.” By 
radio he sent it to the Larsen, which was still fishing in the 
Ross Sea. 

While passing the southern end of the Rockefeller Moun- 
tains we saw a superb peak, the resemblance of which to the 
Matterhorn was so striking as to suggest comparison instantly. 
Only its peak showed above the clouds. I believe we had 
sighted this same peak on the first eastern flight. I wrote a 
message on my chart, which I passed to Balchen. It said: “I 
see land to She East. Lets try it.’ So we headed for the 
peak. 
We had risen to an altitude of 4500 feet. 

The character of the surface began to change subtly and 
one could pick out where the snow lay deep and soft and where 
it had been hardened by wind into a firm crust. Once or twice 
we could make out where rough sastrugi ran over it, like 
ruffled water suddenly frozen into stillness, and we saw as 
well several odd little mounds. But for the most part the 


142 LITTLE AMERICA 


surface appeared quiescent and undisturbed; it is doubtful 
whether there has been any movement here in ages. | 

We had our eyes glued on the mountain, and to our chagrin 
it did not appear to draw nearer, although both planes were 
advancing toward it at the rate of about 100 miles per hour. 
The peak must, therefore, lie close to the 150th meridian, 
the eastern boundary of the Ross Dependency claimed by 
Great Britain and I realized with some satisfaction that i - 
land that lay to the east could be claimed for the United States. 

But as to the nature of that land, the size of the mountains 
which no doubt traversed it, we could not say then, for, as we 
watched, masses of clouds spread over the whole eastern hori- 
zon, blotting out Matterhorn. The sky was still clear to the 
southward and we, therefore, bore due south. 

We flew south 60 miles to Latitude 79° 30’ S. Py 
this time we had penetrated far enough to hope we might te 
able to see the mountains and the “appearance of land” which 
Amundsen reported in Latitude 82°." This land and moun- 
tain he had taken to be a southern prolongation of King Ed- 
ward VII Land and a definite link to the mountains trending 
northward from Carmen Land. No peaks arose to break the 
monotony of the Barrier, but far to the south we saw a dark 
streak flat on the horizon, tantalizingly vague. Could this be 
Amundsen’s land? It was so far away we dared not risk send- 
ing both planes toward it, as a satisfactory excursion must 
bring them rather close to the limit of the fuel supply, so we 
set our course to the northwest and headed directly for Little 
America. 

The surface of the Barrier continued unchanged with roll- 
ing hills and valleys of snow and an occasional pressure ridge. 

To the stretch of land running south of the Rockefeller 
Mountains, and east as far as 150th meridian, I decided to give 
the name of the man who, more than any other, awakened the 
modern world to the importance of the Antarctic—Captain 
Robert Falcon Scott. 


Both planes landed at Little America after a flight of 
four hours and 15 minutes. 

McKinley then asked permission to make a photographic 
mapping survey of the coastline between Little America and 

* Amundsen, “The South Pole,” ii, 170-171. 


NEW LAND TO THE EASTWARD 143 


Hal Flood Bay. This was readily granted, and the Fairchild 
was refueled and made ready for a second flight. Smith was to 
pilot it, and Berkner was to serve as radio operator. 

_ Because I was eager to attempt another assault on the pack 
to get over to the northeast, I hastened down to the City by 
dog team, and ordered Captain Melville to put out to sea as 
soon as possible. Just as I reached the ship, the Fairchild 
wheeled overhead in a parting salute and sped off across the 
E drier. The sound of its passage filled the Bay and echoed 
for a long time in the Barrier cliffs. 

I went at once to the radio room and there had an experience 
which is one of the most thrilling I have ever known. From 
the loud speaker attached to Hanson’s apparatus came a steady, 
throbbing roar—the sound of the Fairchild’s generator puls- 
ing with a beat corresponding to the cycle of the engine. As 
tha engine increased its speed, the roar deepened and filled 
the whole ship; and as the speed slackened, the sound tapered 
off. It ceased entirely when Hanson broke in to send a mes- 
sage, then would resume when Berkner fastened down the key. 
It was a comforting sound; for as long as it persisted, one 
knew that all was well. 

The Fairchild reached Hal Flood Bay about an hour later, 
and reported heavy clouds to the east. I was rather surprised, 
therefore, when McKinley radioed, a short time later, that he 
had the Nunatak in view, and requested permission to fly over 
and photograph it. I could not understand how the Fairchild 
had managed to cover the intervening distance in so short a 
time, but nevertheless gave him permission. More than any 
other I might cite, the incident illustrates the great advance in 
modern exploration. An airplane flying at a rate of two miles 
per minute at an altitude of 6,000 feet in exploratory flight 
could be directed and governed by radio from a point miles 
away. How very different from the conditions that prevailed 
on this same continent scarcely two decades before; when ex- 
ploring parties set out on their lonely journeys and remained 
in the fields for months on end, with no communication with 
their bases; and when Scott and Amundsen, with scarcely 450 
miles between them, patiently waited out the winter to begin 
their competing dashes to the Pole, the one as ignorant of the 
other’s movements as if they had been separated by the Poles. 


144 LITTLE AMERICA 


The contrast was heightened during supper when we heard, 
from the loud speaker, the sounds of Berkner “talking” with 
the Bolling and a short-wave station at San Francisco. 

We had much fun at McKinley’s expense when a message, 
rather humbly worded, confessed that the outcropping of rock 
which he had taken to be the Nunatak was none other than the 
northernmost peak of the Rockefellers. He reported that he 
was flying high above them, for a photographic survey. 

Some time later came a more exciting message. Far to the 
eastward, fifty miles or more from their position, he saw a 
mountain ridge headed by a high peak. This we took to be 
the Antarctic Matterhorn. 

So, for the second time that day, the land we had discovered 
earlier was exposed to human gaze. 

Beyond it lay what is, to all explorers, the true Promised 
Land of Discovery. I was eager to get over it; but at this 
advanced stage of the season, I deemed it prudent to defer 
any further extended flights until the following spring. 

After mapping the Rockefellers, McKinley swung north 
again, then west, to make an oblique strip map of the coast- 
line. Soon we heard the Fairchild overhead. It dipped low 
in greeting, then headed for Little America. We lost sight 
of it as it disappeared, in a curving glide, behind the Barrier; 
but were immediately assured by radio the landing had been 
accomplished without mishap. 

McKinley had surveyed one hundred miles of unmapped 
coast line and the newly discovered mountains in a few hours— 
a job that would have taken many months by dog team or any 
other method. 

The City meanwhile had groped a way through tattered 
patches of sea smoke caused by the colder air from the Barrier 
striking the warmer water, and stood out to sea. We rounded 


East Cape, which is the eastern portal of the Bay of Whales, 
and steered for Cape Colbeck. 


3 A.M. 
Tuesday 
February roth 
At Sea 


For cutting out for oneself the most miserable evening this 


THE AVIATION MECHANICS. 
Left to right:—E. J. Demas, Kennard Bubier, Benjamin Roth, 


Tue Forp HANGAR, WITH MULROY AND PARKER IN THE BACKGROUND. 


15 و لک ب اا r Y‏ 


“SHIVH AA yao AV IHL NI YaChIChHYE ChHI NO oxlayotk p buyog ChHI ANV (po yan I, 
(C3uposheled AS21103) 


PEPI P P 


o a nn 


g. 


NEW LAND TO THE EASTWARD 145 


earth offers, I most heartily recommend a night in an old sail- 
ing ship in Antarctic waters during a severe storm. There 
is nothing like it—at least nothing within my experience. 

The weather is so thick one might cut it with a knife, or, 
better still, hack it apart with a hatchet. The wind is so strong 
that, even with a full head of steam and steering a course a 
few degrees off its eye, the old tub can hardly make its way 
against it. 

We crest a wave and the propeller races with an abandon 
that threatens to tear it apart. I stood near the helmsman a 
while ago and the lash of spray and drift on the face was 
positively blinding. We could barely see beyond the waist of 
the ship. The wind twangs and plays on the rigging an un- 
earthly tune. 

We are constantly menaced by bergs which we cannot see 
until they evolve out of the mist, and they come gliding dis- 
tressingly close alongside. More than once, I thought the 
City must give up the ghost. 

Down below, in the engine room, it is frightful. The din is 
maddening, and the unrestrained pitching and tossing swiftly 
upsets the firmest footing. I take off my hat to Mulroy, Teddy 
Bayer, O’Brien and Sutton. They have kept us afloat this 
night. 

It is bitterly cold. The spray falls on the deck as ice, and 
the air is choked with spindrift which cuts the face. 

We have surrendered all hope of getting to the east by ship, 
and are struggling to return to the Bay of Whales. With bad 
luck, we lost sight of the Barrier, and no doubt have been blown 
somewhat off our course. Melville, Adams, Strom and Erick- 
son have had a very tough time. And have done well. Mel- 
ville was up nearly all night. 

Ga give much for a sight of the sun. 


7:30 oclock 
Same day 
Bay of Whales 


We're back at the berth again, and I have no taste, at least 
for the moment, for further eastern excursions in the City. 
She’s a fine old ship, the toughest of them all, as she proved 
last night, but she is no pleasure craft. 


146 LITTLE AMERICA 


To continue the earlier entry: as I feared, we were well off 
our course. Blind as bats, we were heading merrily, under a 
full head of steam, sails set and a strong wind behind, when 
the sun suddenly appeared over the low mist in time for us to 
get a line on it with the sun compass. 

This gave us our true direction and we found that we were 
headed straight for the cliffs of the west Barrier and we 
changed course, rather hastily, I confess. The old ship came 
about in one of the fastest maneuvers she ever made. 

We then steamed slowly into the wind, and in an hour 
sighted the Barrier. 

About seven o’clock we reached our berth. The sun was 
shining dully and dissipating the mist. 

The City has become a bejewelled ship. Every spar and 
every line glitters with a solid casing of ice. 

A stiff easterly wind is blowing, and our perch is none too 
secure. But now that we are here, we shall try to stay awhile. 
Every one is in need of rest. 

The thermometer is tumbling. Winter cannot be far away. 
The sun is curving lower at the horizon. 

We must get the City away. 


In the scattered moments of calm that were allowed us 
during Wednesday and Thursday, we finished putting ashore 
the last of the supplies. Great masses of floe and bergs drifted 
down on us constantly, forcing us to shift our berth several 
times. Thursday morning, we were alarmed to discover that 
pancake ice had frozen about the ship while she lay, and the 
bay had frozen over near the east Barrier. All information I 
had been able to gather previously indicated that the ship would 
not be in danger of “freezing in” before March Ist. But all 
signs pointed to an early winter, and I was determined to send 
the City north before she became a permanent resident. With 
the small reserve of coal left in her bunkers, she could not long 
struggle against heavy ice. 

So, on Thursday, we made for the east Barrier, to lay 
down several bases in the bays for later airplane flights from 
Little America, and to make a last few soundings near the 
Barrier. Toward evening, we ran into heavy fields of thick 
slush ice. with perhaps a hundred yards of open water between 


NEW LAND TO THE EASTWARD 147 


fields. Progress became increasingly difficult, and the wind, 
after we rounded East Cape, freshened to gale force, blowing 
snow in great sheets from the Barrier. Oddly enough, Little 
America reported at the same time a perfect calm. Gradually 
the fields of slush widened until their edges touched, and be- 
fore long we were completely surrounded by heavy, congeal- 
ing mush. Our situation was undeniably hazardous. <A ces- 
sation in the wind must cause this mass to freeze instantly into 
solid ice, for the night before the thermometer recorded a new 
low of 19° below zero. 

At ten o’clock, Captain Melville gave orders to come about, 
but when we tried to tack ship, she refused to reply. Ice, we 
found, had frozen about the rudder, and the combined strength 
of half a dozen men brought no response. Axes and saws fixed 
to long poles were brought into play, and after considerable 
hacking, which was not easy work in the gale, we managed to 
wear around. We made for the Bay of Whales, and five hours 
later were again tied up to the bay ice. The trip, though un- 
successful from one point of view, was significant from an- 
other. It proved, more vividly than theory could, that the City 
could not risk her presence in the Bay of Whales another day. 

Accordingly I gave orders to Captain Melville to cast off 
at once. I know I shall never forget the moments that fol- 
lowed. Once more it was necessary to split the expedition into 
two divisions, and this time they could not be brought to- 
gether before the following December. There was not a man 
among the 83 who left New Zealand who did not harbor in 
his heart the ambition of becoming a member of the Winter 
Party. But not all could join that group, which we had 
previously limited to 40, and for which number we had pro- 
vided. More, it was obviously necessary to keep both vessels 
staffed with trained crews, and their work, in the larger pur- 
poses of the expedition, was not one whit less important than 
that of the winter party. But making that clear was not 
easy, for men whose minds have set up one ideal are reluctant 
to concede suddenly the equal worth of another. In the end, 
we increased the winter party by two—Quin Blackburn and 
Jim Feury, because we found we needed them. The hardest 
job I ever faced was when I told “Kid” Berlin, a fireman on 
the City, that Chief Engineer McPherson absolutely needed 


148 LITTLE AMERICA 


him on the voyage back, and we could not therefore let him 
remain. Tears streamed down his face, but he smiled at the 
same time, and without a word carried out his orders. He had 
worked like a fiend during unloading operations, and if 
ever a man deserved reward, Berlin deserved it. There were 
several equally bitter things I had to do before the C ity went. 
Teddy Bayer, an engineer on the City, had been equally help- 
ful and I would have asked him to join the winter party had 
Chief Engineer Esmond O’Brien been able to spare him from 
the City’s engine room. 

I tried to tell them all, just before the City left, how greatly 
we appreciated their help and sportsmanship; and it was a 
strange thing to talk to a score of men, with bay ice as a 
platform and the listeners crowded about the rail of an old 
sailing ship, and a subsiding storm hurling spindrift across 
the Bay. Civilization was 2,300 miles away, and somehow 
words did not seem to matter. It is a feeling we cate to know 
better in the Antarctic. An understanding wordlessness comes 
to take the place of language. And I feel that we reached it 
then. 

We watched them weigh anchor, and move away with a 
flutter of canvas. Soon only the City’s masts and spars stood 
out above the writhing sea smoke, and presently these were 
gone. The 42 of us were left alone to our problems. 

It was almost impossible to believe that the most important 
preliminary operation of the expedition—the unloading of the 
ships—was actually accomplished; that 225 tons of supplies 
from the City and 440 tons from the Bolling had been unloaded 
and carried to the base, under really dangerous conditions, with- 
out the loss of a man and only the loss of one or two sacks of 
coal. Some statistician had already figured out that the sledges 
had travelled a total of 12,500 miles in the shuttle operation be- 
tween the ships and Little America. To realize, as I did then, 
that this trying and undeniably difficult piece of work had been 
accomplished by greenhorns for the most part, was to bring 
real satisfaction. What had once been regarded as almost im- 
possible was now done well and behind us. 

It was too cold to stand for long on the bay ice, with the 
temperature at 29° below zero; our parka hoods were covered 


HO. HE 
‘AMOS yche 


'nyatachy{ AHL OL buo yani pon ‚llyammya alotd,, yani ONIGVOING) 


NEW LAND TO THE EASTWARD 149 


with frost. So we got aboard the dog teams which had been 
sent down to meet us, and journeyed to the base. 

It was a journey which I had made several times before, 
but now my senses were more alert to the surroundings, and 
I would be remiss not to describe the trail, or rather the ap- 
proach, to Little America. To the southeast the Barrier rose 
in the form of a cape, the walls of which glittered with blue 
diamonds and curved, higher up, into an overhang modelled 
perhaps by the wind. Behind this cape, the trail bore sharply 
to the east, and as Goodale raced his team around the curve the 
narrow corridor of Ver-sur-Mer Inlet opened before us. The 
ice floor of the inlet was now entirely covered in snow, which 
in turn was littered with crystals as large as marbles. In the 
sun these shone like jewels, and the whole inlet sparkled with 
thousands of pin points of radiance. The sledge runners grated 
against and sometimes crushed these crystals as they struck, 
and then whirred on the smooth, hard snow. 

The old pressure ridges still lifted their shattered structures 
in the air, and we sighted several seal holes. The scene was in 
truth alive with colors, the blue in the ice cliffs to the North 
fading imperceptibly into the roseate hues of the Barrier. 
After we traversed the bay, the trail rose gradually, then with 
increasing steepness. The dogs had to dig in, bellies flat against 
the snow, to gain leverage, and their breaths discharged like 
jets of vapor from a valve. 

A last pull, and we topped the rise. Little America lay be- 
fore us. And we saw the three houses, with only a few feet 
of orange sides showing above the snow, the black hulks of 
the airplanes, the three spidery wireless masts spreading fila- 
ments of wire 65 feet above them, and underneath groups of 
beetle-like figures moved busily about. 

Some distance behind the houses scores of crates and 
boxes lay in a shapeless pile, with the yellow heads of gasoline 
drums showing here and there above the snow. Stretches of 
tarpaulin showed where other caches lay protected from the 
elements. A line of brown tents and white ran through the 
center of the settlement, and nearby were the dog crates. 
From the mess hall, perhaps I should call it the kitchen, came 
the sounds of considerable activity and a welcome column of 
smoke. Tennant was preparing supper. 


150 LITTLE AMERICA 


Behind the colony to the eastward, the Barrier curved 
around to form the basin. This basin was about a mile in 
diameter. The rim was formed by a series of little hills of 
snow except at the entrance to the west where it descended 
into Ver-sur-Mer Inlet. Here the houses were grouped. On 
the eastern rim ran a line of haycocks and crevasses. Far 
away, the valley disappeared into the flank of vaguely seen 
hillocks. East, north and south was the eternal Barrier, roll- 
ing and indefinite, glowing with strange, swiftly changing 
warm colors. 

This was our home, and, now that the City was gone, we 
pitched in to make it firm and snug against approaching winter. 


During the next few days, the battle shifted to the north, 
while the Bolling raced south with her second load, and the 
City strove to push north. And all the while the pack threat- 
ened to erect an impenetrable barrier between them. The issue 
remained in doubt for days, and during that period there was 
little rest for the radiomen or me. 

The radios, I think, tell the story. 


Feb. 23 

Compr. BYRD: 

Ice seems thicker continually and is in pans of several acres. 
A few minutes ago struck a big area and broke ice about four or 
five inches thick for more than a mile. Making only about one 
knot. Freezing seems to be going on continually and in a few 
hours the City would have made headway only with greatest 
difficulty. The ice is also freezing in our wake as we pass. 


BERKNER. 


Later 


Comov. BYRD: pad 
We have wind SSW force 4. Under steam and sail pushing 
our way through new ice as far as the eye can see. The thickness 
of this new ice is from six to twelve inches and appears to be 
forming between the widely separated ice packs, which are small 
but can be seen in every direction. Thus far we have had na 
great difficulty but it appears that the ice is getting thicker as 
we go along to the Northwest. Johansen continuously aloft look- 


NEW LAND TO THE EASTWARD 151 


ing for leads. We will keep you constantly advised as we pro- 
gress. 
MELVILLE, 


Later 
Feb. 23 
CAPTAIN MELVILLE: 


Suggest that you use kerosene lamps and hold down heating of 
quarters as much as possible in order to conserve coal. Good luck 
in your battle. I believe you probably have pack to the North 
and open water to the West around the 180th Meridian. 


BYRD. 


Later 
Feb. 23 
Comov. BYRD: 

Barometer 29.32. Wind SSE, force 5. Temperature of air 
14, water 29. Making good time now through scattered ice pack 
under steam and sail. Occasional snow flurries but visibility good. 
Due to the fact that water temperature is rising and the new ice 
seems to be getting thinner. Both Johansen and I deem it advisa- 
ble to proceed towards the Larsen. Agree that may be lighter 
pack westward, and have been setting more towards the t8o with 
seemingly improved conditions. Regards. 

MELVILLE. 


Next day conditions were worse, and the City ran her nose 
against very thick pack. By radio I asked the Larsen, which 
was then making ready to start north, to stand by and await 
the City’s arrival. An emergency existed, for the City’s sup- 
ply of coal, sadly depleted as a result of constant steaming 
during the stormy weather at the Bay of Whales, was not 
sufficient to sustain her through a long struggle with heavy 
ice. If she failed in that struggle, she would in all likelihood 
become imprisoned in the ice for the winter, with attendant 
danger to her hull and crew. To discover such heavy pack so 
early in the season was a blow. It had developed many days 
in advance of its seasonal appearance, and when the City 
started north I was quite sure that she had a sufficient safety 
factor of coal to see her through. These facts I laid before 
Captain Nilsen of the Larsen, in the following message : 


152 LITTLE AMERICA 


New York has not enough coal to keep her going if she meets 
further serious resistance from the ice. Needless to say, I did not 
anticipate the New York would have difficulty in keeping rendez- 
vous with Bolling at position of Larsen to supply the City with 
coal and food. 

I am sure you can understand the great apprehension I have 
for my comrades on the New York. As I consider the status of 
the New York perilous, there is nothing I can do but ask 
your help again. 

The New York is now 270 miles from you, making 7 or 8 
knots under sail and steam. She should be only 111 miles from 
you by noon tomorrow. I am hoping that you can delay long 
enough to give her fresh whale meat and coal enough to get her 
through the pack and to New Zealand. I can have the Bolling 
meet you and repay coal. Best of wishes. 

I am reluctant to let the Bolling come through the pack as she 
has developed a leak in after hold. 

Bypp. 


Later 
Feb. 24 
Comov. Byvo: 


Lat. 76.52 5. Long. 171.50 W. Water temperature 28, air 21. 
Wind SSE, force 6. Sea moderate, sky overcast. Visibility good. 
Widely.scattered pack during last four hours. Making good time 
under sail and steam. Bar. 29.22 falling slowly. After leaving 
Bay of Whales encountered new ice for at least 80 miles which 
appeared to close in quickly and freeze behind us. This ice in- 
creased in thickness to from eight to ten inches. At 11:30 we 
were stuck. It was possible to move forward again only by the 
use of additional sail and steam. Since that time conditions have 
improved up to the present. 

MELVILLE. 


Several days before I had accepted the inevitable, and in- 
structed Captain Brown to give up his attempts to force the 
pack with the Bolling. No real emergency existed at the base, 
thanks to the careful planning and foresight which had gov- 
erned the selection of material taken on the Bolling’s first voy- 
age. Naturally, we might have used the additional houses, 
the small airplane, and the 14 dogs which Brown had aboard, 
but we could manage without these. We had already decided 


NEW LAND TO THE EASTWARD 153 


to build snow houses to take the place of the wooden struc- 
tures. Certainly our needs were not dire enough to risk the 
presence of the Bolling, as well as the lives of her crew, in the 
pack. It was an unpleasant task to deflect the officers and 
crew from a job they were determined to accomplish, but it 
had to be done. T instructed Captain Brown to stand by, out- 
side the pack, pending the outcome of the City’s battle. He 
radioed me as follows: 


Feb. 25 
Comov. BYRD: 

Your sad message received. Sorry not to be able to go through. 
All hands are raring to go. We have seen no ice thus far, so 
why don’t you let me try? You know that experts said before it 
would be impossible to get into Bay of Whales. Would a depot 
at Scott’s last winter quarters in McMurdo Sound do any good? 
My gang and I will go to Hell for you. Please answer, as we are 
still hoping. 


Later 
Byvo, 


BARRIER STATION WFA: 


This to inform you that we are now ready for departure. 
At present strong weather with heavy sea and we are trying to get 
out into clear water. We will ascertain from City her position and 
will endeavor to locate her. In my opinion it will be impossible 
to bunker her in this kind of weather and as far as I can see at 
present the only way will be to take crew on board and aban- 
don City. Will keep you informed on progress if anything should 
turn up to the better. 

NILSEN. 


Later 
Compr. BYRD: 

Our 8 p.m. position dead reckoning Latitude 74.20 S. Long. 
by observation 179.30 E. Crossed date line 5 p.m. and steering 
more west again to find clear water as we have again encountered 
a heavy pack of decayed bergs and old ice which is probably 
that reported south of Larsen. Heavy SW swell. Barometer 
29.20. Wind SSE. Overcast. Obtaining frequent bearings on 
Larsen who also reports Be is moving westward. 

MELVILLE. 


4 LITTLE AMERICA 


The distressing fact in this episode that made me reluctant 
to press Captain Nilsen more than necessary was that we were 
asking him to risk the lives of 230 men for those of a score. 
He had informed me in an earlier message, that heavy pack 
enfolded his ship, and “it looks as if the packs have spread all 
over the Ross Sea from east to west.” Nevertheless, he met 
the issue squarely with the promise, “If there is any real peril 
to City or any other ship, I will proceed at once with the C. 4. 
Larsen and do our best.” That he did. The Larsen was 
north of the pack that lay between two ships, and Captain 
Nilsen therefore dispatched several of his small fast chasers to 
the City’s aid. A subsequent message reported that they had 
found passage to the westward. 

The affair soon drew to a satisfactory conclusion. 


Feb. 26 
Compr. Byvp: 

We have direction finder on City New York and two of the 
chasers racing towards her. We following her. Slight NW wind, 
Temp. 2 centigrade minus, pancake ice. 

NILSEN. 


Feb. 27 
Comov. Byko: 


So far we have not picked up chasers but think we should see 
them nearly any time now. 
MELVILLE. 


Feb. 28 
Comov. Byrp: 

Arrived at Larsen 11 p.m. last night. Went alongside 12:35 
P.M. this morning. Took on board approximately go tons of coal 
and some provisions. Finished 3:30 a.m. and all sailed at 4 A.M. 
Now going through pack to Northward. All well. Regards. 


MELVILLE, 


And in this manner a potentially dangerous situation came 
to an end. Brown, on the Bolling, hove to outside the pack, 
awaiting the City, sent this message on March 1: 


NEW LAND TO THE EASTWARD 155 


Compr. Byvo: 

Noon position Lat. 56.47 S Long. 172.01 E. Strong NW gale, 
heavy, tremendous sea washing all over ship. Have been hove to 
since 2 A.M. Am going North. Barometer 29. Air 45°. One of 
the dogs got six pups during storm. All going well. Regards. 

Brown. 


It is, indeed, an ill wind that blows no good. We had 
hopes of using those pups very nicely in the following spring. 


The building and organization of Little America was a 
fine piece of work. It was accomplished mainly under the 
direction of Dr. Gould and Captain McKinley, and She 
hammer of Chips Gould, the carpenter. The houses and the 
plan of locating them had been worked out in New York 
before our departure by my friend, Edgar Barratt, an archi- 
tect, and his son, Roswell Barratt. This plan called for the 
erection of five main buildings, but as three of them were in 
the Bolling’s hold when she turned back, we fell somewhat 
short of the blue print requirements. In fact, we would be 
confronted with considerable congestion in our quarters un- 
less we made use of every plank and box we could lay our 
hands on. Here the ingenuity and economy of “Chips” Gould 
came into natural play, and I dare say there was not much 
more than a sliver of wood that he did not bend and nail to his 
shrewd designs. 

From one of the airplane crates he built a machine shop 
and storehouse for the aviation mechanics, which was located 
about forty yards northwest of the mess hall. Parts of another 
airplane crate served as the walls and structure of a radio store- 
room, which was located about half-way between the mess 
house and the administration building. 

For Davies, the physicist, a non-magnetic house was 
evolved out of odds and ends of lumber. Braathen and Walden, 
the recluses of the expedition, were at work on a little house; 
and by quietly, in fact furtively, saving every scrap of wood 
that escaped Gould (and some that did not escape him), they 
soon had enough material to build a separate residence for 
themselves. This they put up about 75 feet south of the mess 
hall. 


156 LITTLE AMERICA 


All kinds of construction were under way when the City 
sailed, and Little America was as busy as a boom town. 
George Black, the supply officer, was at work on his store 
house. This he created by digging a large hole in the snow 
just off the main trail between the mess hall and the ad- 
ministration building, about twenty yards from the latter. He 
caused the boxes to serve as their own protecting walls, and by 
covering the hole with a tarpaulin had a very snug shelter 
which was of course soon snowed over. 

Several other additions were planned to the growing num- 
ber of buildings radiating about the mess hall. One of these 
was the third bunk house, which was to adjoin Czegka’s 
machine shop and open on a vestibule cut into the snow. On 
the other end of the mess hall we proposed to build a dark 
room and photographic laboratory for McKinley, Rucker and 
Van der Veer. 

Hanson and his men were already at work on their radio 
laboratory, which was no more than a corner of the ad- 
ministration building. Into this limited space they must crowd 
their cumbersome and complicated apparatus. For power they 
depended upon the Kohler plant in the machine shop, the juice 
being carried overland by wires. This same plant also fed the 
lighting system, such as it was. We had even then begun to 
conserve gasoline, which this plant normally consumed, and 
June and Czegka had ingeniously arranged so that it used kero- 
sene instead. It was essential that we save gasoline for avia- 
tion operations in the spring. Because the radio department 
would demand most of the power, the number of electric lights 
in the camp was limited—one for the cook in the mess hall, one 
for the radio generator, one for the Norwegian house, and two 
for the photographic laboratory. Another large bulb was used 
as a safety beacon on one of the radio towers. Gasoline pres- 
sure lamps and kerosene lamps provided the illumination for the 
other buildings and houses. 

The principal structures in the colony were the administra- 
tion building, the mess hall and the Norwegian House. The 
first of these was named the Edgar Barratt House; the second, 
the Roswell Barratt House, after the two men, my friends, 
who designed them, and the third was named the Biltmore. 
The first two were portable houses, designed and built in New 


& 


‘mous Aq palalca Koe shoo poo$ 3lom səsnoy a53ac, 


‘NOILOAYLSNO7) HONA AVIY yani NI ISNOH kytoyamnox IHI num "MYH SSA] IHL 


 BIHLAChChYH 4404 MON #0 chu? ChHI YaO MIA) sarg XIChYD ChAITXIL IHL „2001 #00g) “okot 06, 
(3uposheted X*va3lpogy) 


NEW LAND TO THE EASTWARD 157 


York to serve a particular purpose, They were divided, for 
example, into sections of 3x8 feet, each section weighing 
about 106 pounds, so that two men could handle them with 
ease. Ina test in New York, before we left, it was found that 
either house could be assembled in five hours. 

They were designed, naturally, less for elegance than for 
strength and resistance to cold. The walls were four inches 
thick. Outside was a layer of stiff building board, one-half 
an inch thick. Next were two layers of paper, a layer of 
building board, then one and one-half inches of insulating 
material, and then more fibrous building board. The outside 
was sealed with three coats of orange paint. The walls and 
roof were bolted to a frame of yellow pine. Not a nail was 
used in the structure, and the bolts with which it was tied to- 
gether were not allowed to end on the outside. Transmission 
of cold was thus reduced to a minimum. 

The foundation of the houses were set deep in the snow, 
and then, when the roofs were put on, snow was packed 
tightly and smoothly about them. In this way they were pro- 
tected from the wind and snow, and only the fiercest kind of 
blizzard could injure them, 

As ours was the largest expedition to winter in the Ant- 
arctic, we had our own peculiar problems. The fire hazard 
was an ever-present worry, for the loss of home by fire during 
the winter night could have but one ending on this inhospitable 
continent. We therefore set up the two main buildings 200 
yards apart, knowing that if one burned, the other would 
escape. The supplies and other vital equipment were scattered 
about for the same reason. 

There was still another reason recommending such distri- 
bution. The most persistent and insinuating foe to explorers 
who endure the winter night is monotony. It is a thing, of 
course, many of us know and for that matter endure even in 
the center of civilization; but nowhere else can it be experi- 
enced to such a degree as in the polar night. For there can 
be few ways in which to escape monotony. Bitter cold and 
incessant storms keep all but the hardiest men indoors a greater 
part of the time; and even they do not care to venture very far. 
Consequently, men are thrown into the utmost intimacy for 
months on end, within the narrow, restricting walls of their 


158 LITTLE AMERICA 


shacks; and the time inevitably comes when all the topics in 
the world have been sucked dry of interest; when one man’s 
voice becomes irritating to the ears of another; when the most 
trivial points of disagreement become fraught with impassioned 
meaning. When that point is reached, there comes trouble. 

By scattering houses and work places, we hoped to give 
greater scope to the physical activities of the men. It would 
not be necessary to remain cooped up in one place. And to 
assist communication, we ultimately created a fascinating sys- 
tem of tunnels connecting the various units of the colony. The 
first tunnel was dug between the administration building and 
the mess hall, a very laborious undertaking. It was six feet 
deep. Food boxes were laid along the sides. The corridor, 
then, was little more than the width of a man’s shoulders; and 
the bigger men such as Clark, Strom and Smith had to go 
through it somewhat sidewise. Over the boxes we laid a strip 
of canvas. As the tunnel progressed, passages were opened 
into the store rooms and workshops so that, when we finished, 
we had a comprehensive system of subterranean communica- 
tion which brought all the scattered units of the colony within 
reach of a traveller who need never once venture above the 
surface. Both Mawson and Amundsen had built short tun- 
nels about their shacks, but never in the history of exploration 
was there a system as elaborate as ours. In them we dwelt 
what Mawson has aptly called a “‘troglodytic existence,” a 
reduced and undeniably limited one, but on the whole a more 
active and diversified existence, perhaps, than most other ex- 
peditions were able to contrive. 

Space does not permit of a full description of the multiple 
phases of our operations. The erection of the radio towers, 
for example, was a romantic accomplishment of itself, Two 
men who had never engaged in iron work before, Jim Feury 
and Teddy Bayer, assembled these towers, and the thorough- 
ness with which they did it may be judged from the fact that 
the structures outlived the worst blizzards. 

What busy days they were! And yet not a few of us found 
them to be happy ones. We met the advancing winter with a 


great show of industry and the satisfaction that well-ordered 
and effective labor brings, 


CHAPTER VIII
INCIDENT ON THE ROCKEFELLER MOUNTAINS


THE winter night was in reality close at hand. Deepening 
shadows on the horizon at the midnight hour heralded its 
approach, and we now increased our efforts to have all ex- 
ternal tasks completed before really cold weather set in. We 
were most anxious to have the cache on the Barrier trans- 
ferred to the base; for successive snow storms and high winds 
had repeatedly covered it with drift and the supplies were 
buried half the time. After each storm it was necessary for 
all hands to join the snow shovel squad and retrieve them. 
Half a dozen dog teams and the snowmobile were assigned to 
this work, and the supplies poured in at a marvellous rate. 
The journey to the cache was hardly what one would call a 
hazardous one: the distance was only 4 miles, the trail was 
well marked out with flags, and the drivers had by this time 
become accustomed to the surroundings. But the swiftness 
with which storms fell and smothered visibility imparted an 
element of danger even to this short journey, and I repeatedly 
instructed the drivers to observe caution. In the event of a 
severe blizzard, I recommended that they try to wait it out, 
rather than run the risk of becoming lost and perhaps falling 
off the edge of the Barrier. For this reason, sleeping bags were 
considered compulsory equipment on all sledges. 

In spite of these precautions, we did not escape a very 
serious “scare”. 

On the morning of March 4, Blackburn, Siple and Thorne 
set out with their teams for the cache. Siple had his double 
freight sledge, and Blackburn a small basket sledge. Condi- 
tions when they started were not bad, the wind was light and 
the temperature about zero. However, they changed very 


159 


160 LITTLE AMERICA 


quickly, and within an hour the wind was blowing hard, and 
visibility was choked off by thick drift. In fact, Balchen and 
Strom, who came in from a trip to the Bay, reported that the 
drift was so dense it was impossible to see beyond the end of 
the skis. 

Thorne and Siple presently came in with their loads, but 
Blackburn was not with them. A mile north of Little America 
they had turned off the trail to drop part of the loads. Black- 
burn’s dogs, however, had refused to turn, and Thorne and 
Siple saw him disappear into the drift, vainly trying to halt 
the dogs. The two men managed to reach the base after some 
difficulties, and were somewhat surprised not to find Blackburn 
already there. 

By this time the wind had risen to 40 miles per hour, and 
the drift was dense. It was snug enough in the houses, where 
the stoves threw off enervating warmth, and for a time we 
saw no reason to become alarmed over Blackburn’s absence. 

But when I learned he had failed to take his sleeping bag, 
then I did have fears for his safety. I took Gould and Thorne 
with me, and started down the trail. Outside was uproar, 
with the sharp edge of driving drift. We carried a compass. 
Every few feet we put down a flag, not only to guide our- 
selves back, but also Blackburn if by chance he was still stum- 
bling about in the confusion of snow and wind. Some distance 
out we came across a new crevasse which had opened across 
the old trail, and in the storm it looked ominous. Reaching the 
cache, we investigated the small valley into which Thorne had 
seen Blackburn disappear, and finally made our way back to 
the base, without having come across his trail. However, we 
realized it was very possible that we passed within a few feet 
of him, with neither party aware of it, for the drift most of 
the time shut down visibility almost to the tip of one’s nose, 
and the wind swiftly extinguished the loudest shout. 

Without pausing we sallied forth, this time more to the 
west, and still failed to find him. I was then convinced that 
he was either lost to the east of the trail or still in the vicinity 
of the cache. I was reluctant to believe he had fallen off the 
Barrier, an idea that had taken hold of several imaginations. 

A more efficient drag-net was set in operation. Gould, 
O’Brien and Feury went out to conduct a search along 


LITT MONS yachax p 
SAXOG T004 to 5507 AHL tmyalyach I OL TINNAY, ONIGUNG achy77t1Ya OXIChOC MODA LV NIW 


(‘3aposhele $93110) 


= 


INCIDENT ON ROCKEFELLER MOUNTAINS 161 


the northern edge of the Barrier. They carried a goodly 
amount of alpine rope, and were tied together, lest one of them 
venture out too far. Then parties of dog teams were dis- 
patched to the cache, whence they were to work, fan-wise, to 
the east and north. 

The whole camp, by this time, was alarmed. 

However, the incident closed on a happy note when a team 
under Vaughan, with Bursey, de Ganahl and Thorne in com- 
pany, came upon several dark lumps in the snow, and found 
them to be Blackburn’s dogs. Curled in a hole in the snow, 
with gasoline cans piled up to provide shelter, was Blackburn. 
He lay in the lee of his sledge, with the dogs dug in beside him. 
He was unharmed by exposure, although he had been out for 
eight hours, and I was pleased that he had had the good sense 
not to continue travelling when he realized he was lost. 

One may judge his astonishment when he learned he was 
less than half a mile from the base, and the flags we had so 
painfully put down to guide him passed within 20 yards of his 
hole. 

W ednesday 
March 5 

Still busy. 

Brophy is no longer connected with the expedition. I have 
accepted his resignation. He is in a very nervous condition 
and it is impossible for him to continue to handle the details 
of the expedition. 

I have urged him to take a long rest and hope he has the 
wisdom to do it. I have done everything within my power 
to make it easy for him. Heaven knows, there is still a great 
deal of work to be done in New Zealand, with units based 
there, and for weeks now we have had to handle no end of 
intricate details by radio from here, trying to straighten things 
out. His breakdown seems complete, and it is a great pity all 
around. 

Mr. Tapley will be in charge of expedition affairs in New 
Zealand. 

Several new projects are in the air. 

Tomorrow, weather permitting, the dog teams will be sent 
out to establish three preliminary depots on the Barrier. These 

will be laid down in preparation for the spring journeys. With 


162 LITTLE AMERICA 


good luck, there is no reason why they should not be able to 
carry their loads at least 40 miles south. 

None of the men, it is true, has had previous experience 
in Antarctic sledging, but the experiences of Vaughan and 
Goodale with Grenfell in Labrador and with Walden in New 
Hampshire, as well as the experience they have acquired dur- 
ing unloading operations, should stand them in good stead. 
Vaughan will be in charge of the first sledge, Bursey of the 
second, then Goodale and Crockett. 

De Ganahl will be navigator and Petersen will go along as 
radio operator. 

There have been many conferences, and I think the men 
now understand their problems. Apart from the necessity of 
getting the bases down, the trip will be beneficial from other 
considerations. There are many things to learn about the pro- 
tection of hands and feet from cold and moisture, and how 
best to make use of the clothing which has been made for use on 
the tramp. Frozen feet and hands, uncomfortable nights, and 
real suffering inevitably follow failure to acquire proper pro- 
tection. There are tricks in using a sleeping bag and in keep- 
ing it dry, in the preservation of mukluks, socks, mittens and 
the rest. Moisture collects in them, freezes, and causes all 
kinds of trouble. It is one thing to be told about precautions, 
but effective knowledge can be gained only by experience on the 
trail. There is also the problem of pitching camp and getting 
an early start in the morning—both very important points. We 
shall learn something as a result of this trip, and during the 
winter all hands can work up the best methods of “beating” 
these problems. 

Gould is very anxious to make a flight to the Rockefellers, 
for a geological survey. Poor Larry, he has been compelled to 
dull his geological hammer on the ends of boxes while the 
rocks in the Rockefellers fairly cried out for investigation. 
Such a journey would be very important, but, frankly, I am 
not eager to see him undertake it at this advanced period with 
winter so near. The weather has been stormy and cold, and I 
am not sure the flight can be made without considerable risk. 

| We shall see what comes of the weather, If Haines pro- 
vides clear skies, he may go, if he still wishes. If we can 


INCIDENT ON ROCKEFELLER MOUNTAINS 163 


squeeze in this investigation now, we shall undeniably have 
that much more time for other work next spring. 

Hanson and his men have been working steadily on the 
main radio set, and today they finished. Heretofore, we have 
cleared our traffic through the small sets on the Bolling and 
the City, with surprisingly good results. 

The main station is a most prepossessing looking affair. 
Hanson has displayed real ingenuity in making the most of his 
limited space, and the corner of the administration building 
which we now call the Ochs Radio Station, in honor of the 
friend who has done so much for me. The Station is an 
anomalous blend of the primitive and the highly modern. On 
a bleak and roughly hewn table the various dials and bulbs 
rise in tiers of subtly organized combinations. It gives one a 
strange sense of power to realize that within these bare walls, 
hung with cumbersome winter clothing, is a force that puts us 
within one-eighth of a second of New York City. 

And that outside, in the aircraft, is a second power that can 
carry us easily and at great speed over this formidable Conti- 
nent. 

How few of us realize that it is only during the past cen- 
tury that man has been able to travel rapidly, and to impose 
his will directly and instantly beyond the range of his voice. 
The mere extension of these abilities has ceased to surprise us 
in civilization; and no doubt because they are become common- 
place conveniences, we are more sensitive to the nuisances they 
often do involve. 

But down here on this dead ice cap, where what a man 
could do has heretofore been limited to the power of his legs 
and heart and the blind courage of his dogs and ponies, the 
possession of them is a wonderful gift. Even the ring of the 
telephone in the administration building strikes a note of 
cheerful competence. Or so it seems now. I suppose it will 
become a bother soon enough. 


Thursday, March 7th, both units—the Fokker and the dog 
teams—took their departure from camp. Just before the 
departure of the teams, I dispatched Balchen and Braathen on 
a mission to mark a path through or around the pressure ridges 


164 LITTLE AMERICA 


and cracks in the bay ice, as well as the crevasses to the south- 
west of the camp, They were to mark this trail with flags, 
and thus save the base-laying party the inconvenience as well 
as danger of searching for a route. Some of these crevasses 
were open and others were closed over by shallow and insub- 
stantial bridges, which might let through a heavily loaded 
sledge. Balchen and Braathen carefully identified a safe 
passage, and from that point cu the drivers could expect 
smooth Barrier until they reached the place which Amundsen 
called The Trap. 

Each team carried a load of 800 pounds, and the party was 
given the following designations : 


TEAM No. I—VAUGHAN 
NON-MAGNETIC TEAM 


Compass (requiring non-magnetic sledge) 
Sleeping bag and gear 

De Ganahl’s bag and gear 

50 flags ` 

Alpine rope 

2 pair of skis and bamboo poles 
Navigating instruments 

Amundsen’s sledge meter 1 


TEAM No. 2—GOoOODALE 
CAMPING TEAM 


Sleeping bag and gear 
I pair of skis 

I axe 

t shovel 

3 tents 

4 ice picks 

Man food 


*This sledge meter, which Amunds i j 
3 en carried on the polar jo 
a personal gift to Admiral Byrd. EN 


INCIDENT ON ROCKEFELLER MOUNTAINS 165 


TEAm No. 3—BurseEy 
DEPOT-LAYING TEAM 


Sleeping bag and gear 
Depot supplies 

t hatchet 

4 tents 

Snow knife 

I pair of skis 

Depot bamboo flagpoles 
I shovel 

Emergency clothing 


TEAM No. 4—Crockett 
RADIO TEAM 


Sleeping bags and gear 
Petersen’s bag and gear 
Extra wood runner and bolts 
Drill 

tpaxe 

Six pair of snowshoes 
2 skis and poles 

150 flags 

Extra compass 

Sledge meter 

Alpine rope 
Emergency food 
Radio set with mast? 


In addition, the teams carried 1,700 pounds of dog pemmi- 
can, which was divided among the sledges in amounts that 
brought up the total loads of each to about 800 pounds, 

Of the load, approximately 1350 pounds were to be dis- 
tributed among three depots. The first, 20 miles south, the 
second 40, and the third 44. Vaughan was requested to use 
great care in marking the depots, lest the winter blizzards ob- 


"This set is known as a portable transmitter, using two radio tubes of a 
type used almost universally in storage battery receivers. Power, 7.5 watts. 
Antenne, a single wire held aloft on two bamboo poles sunk in the snow. 


166 LITTLE AMERICA 


literate all traces of the trail. Hence the large supply of flags. 
Twenty flags were to be placed about each base, to the west, 
at intervals of a quarter of a mile, and an equal number to 
the east. The most precious thing in sledging on fixed rations 
is time, ard the hours lost in searching for poorly marked de- 
pots have brought great suffering, if not ruin, to many ex- 
ploring parties. Of course we could not hope to make these 
depots as conspicuous as a red traffic light on Fifth Avenue; 
but on a rolling plain of snow conspicuous for its lack of land- 
marks these little orange-red flags could be picked up by a 
sledge party even if slightly off its course. More, I saw in 
them the possibility of a considerable aid to navigation in the 
southern flights planned for the following spring, for they 
would provide control points for the checking of compasses in 
flight and as a check against local error. 

The rest of the flags were to be used in marking the south- 
ern route, to facilitate the return journey. Because this was 
primarily a test trip, they were instructed to make liberal use 
of the flags, rather than run the risk of becoming lost. Storms 
of considerable force were to be expected almost any time, 
and it behooved a party on the trail to execute its mission as 
quickly as possible and return. This meant travelling even in 
the face of storm and semi-darkness: and under such condi- 
tions a string of closely placed flags, leading directly to the 
base, would be a life line. 

The men were liberally provided with cold weather clothing. 
Lower temperatures than prevailed in the protection of our 
basin might be expected on the Barrier: in his first season’s 
marches during March, Amundsen experienced temperatures 
as low as 45.4° below zero,! which he described as “rather 
te3u 

The start of She trip was full of excitement. The clear, cold 
air was as heady as a draught of fine wine, which suffused a 
sensation of well-being in every one, dogs as well as men. The 
dogs were like coiled springs, waiting the signal to start. They 
filled the basin with the sound of barking. Some lay in the 
snow, munching it placidly. But others, impatient for action, 
quarrelled constantly, with a great show of force, but withal an 


* Amundsen, “The South Pole.” i 232 
, sage Ds » 240, 
? Ibid, 1. 246. ae 


INCIDENT ON ROCKEFELLER MOUNTAINS 167 


amiable intent. There were some excellent dogs among them: 
Bursey’s leader, St. Lunaire, a brown Labrador husky, one of 
the hardest workers I ever saw, and possessing an uncanny 
sense of direction ; Crockett’s leader, Quimbo, a son of Chinook, 
eighty pounds of belligerency and competent leadership ; Good- 
ale’s leader, Blizzard, a fine Labrador husky, of the same breed 
as St. Lunaire, with a splendid dark gray coat, and Vaughan’s 
leader, Dinny, a black malamute with soulful eyes and the dis- 
position of Puck. And there were, of course, in Vaughan’s 
and Goodale’s teams, those inseparable companions, Moody 
and Watch, Targish and Dingo. 

When the signal to start was given, the teams went off 
with a rush, Vaughan’s leading, with the drivers fighting to 
keep the sledges upright as they tore down the slope into the 
inlet and the dogs throwing up clouds of snow. They rounded 
the bend on single runners, and I thought: well, that’s very 
fine now, but I dare say you will settle down to a less lively 
pace before long. 

We turned to help the geological mission on its way. It 
was then 3 o’clock. 

A short time later, the Fokker shook its skis clear of the 
Barrier, and headed east. Balchen piloted, June served as 
radio man and Dr. Gould, of course, was in charge. They 
carried provisions for several months, the usual emergency 
equipment and Larry’s precious theodolite. I watched them 
start with some misgivings. With winter so near, any failure 
of this operation must result, I felt, in danger. Soon I 
received a message from the Fokker in flight: 


Everything fine with plane about 40 miles from base 


headed towards Mts. 
LARRY. 


About two hours later a second message announced the 
Fokker’s safe arrival at the foot of Chips Gould Mountain. 
Gould reported: “Sky overcast and no hope of getting position 
tonight. Very warm and calm. All hands eager to be in the 
hills tomorrow.” 

In Little America we turned to the task of getting rid of 
the snow that covered everything, and the snow shovel became 


168 LITTLE AMERICA 


the most prominent and hated thing in the camp. The Barrier 
cache was again obliterated by the blizzard, and a crew of men 
was sent out to locate and retrieve the remaining supplies. 
Another group was engaged in killing seals out on the bay ice. 
Killing Weddell seals is not exactly a sport. Even when the 
amateur hunters made loud noises in an attempt to arouse the 
beasts into some semblance of activity, they promptly returned 
to their snoring as soon as the racket subsided. Braathen 
protested that the only way he could escape a charge of murder 
was by first giving the seals a hearty dig in the ribs, which 
awakened them, and then rushing off to a sporting distance 
before he fired a shot: we really hated to kill these poor 
creatures, but necessity knows no law; we needed fresh meat 
in quantities, both the men and dogs, and had to overlook the 
niceties. Fortunately, by then, we had about 250 carcasses, 
and soon could call a halt to the unpleasant business. 


Friday 
March Sth 


Weather continues good. Every man in the camp going 
full speed ahead. Gould, the ¢arpenter, Mulroy, Parker, 
Rucker and McKinley are putting the finishing touches to the 
dark room, and Owen is assembling a library in my office. He 
has been appointed librarian. As we have about 3,000 volumes 
in the collection, he has his hands full assorting them. 


Both the Geological unit and the Trail Party report every- 
thing O. K. 


Saturday 
March oth 


A terrific blizzard has been raging all day, compelling us 
to shut down on all outside jobs. The wind at times reached 
a velocity of 60 miles per hour. A message from Gould says 
that everything is fine. There has been no word today from 
the Trail Party. No doubt Petersen has been unable to get up 
his radio pole in this strong wind. 


* This library was named the David Lyman Library. 


INCIDENT ON ROCKEFELLER MOUNTAINS 169 


Sunday 
March roth 


It was 19° below zero last night. The wind blew quite 
hard during the day, but it has fallen off, and we have dis- 
patched four men and dog teams to the Barrier cache, under 
the leadership of McKinley. It is time we had all supplies in 
camp. 

Both field units report all well. 

The dogs here did not fare very well last night. They 
howled all night long. Possibly the sound of the wind 
awakened some strange emotion in them. Then, too, we found 
their crates packed full of snow. 

Several of the dogs broke loose this morning, and en- 
gaged in a terrible brawl. They performed a great deal of 
extemporaneous surgery on one another, and two appear to 
be quite badly torn. Of course there was a lady at the bottom 
BE he alat ege usually 15 We “all Teel quite 
badly to have the dogs torn up in their own brawls, for they 
are great pets. Dr. Coman is busy taking stitches in the 
wounds. 

Josephine I is having a hard time. Last night, when 
every one was asleep, save the watchman, she stole into the 
administration building and tried to make off with one of the 
rugs. The noise she made soon awakened every one, and there 
were loud protests. We were puzzled as to why she wanted 
the rug until we discovered that her crate was nearly full of 
snow, and her litter of puppies were shivering in the cold. I 
fancy she was doing her best to save them. As the snow ac- 
cumulated, she and the puppies had retreated to the very end 
of the box, then, in desperation, the mother came out seeking 
help. She had to cut through six feet of tightly packed snow 
with her paws and teeth. 

The puppies were in a bad way. This morning, we dug 
a hole in one side of the tunnel, and moved the crate there. It 
is much warmer in the tunnel, and perhaps we shall be able to 
save them. 

Poor Josephine P was not as fortunate. Her six pups 
froze to death. She made a pathetic effort to carry them into 
the lee of the airplane machine shop, but they perished before 


ty 


we 


Sh? 


170 LITTLE AMERICA 


she could move them. We found her this morning trying to 

make the poor dead things suckle. She was quite distraught. 
We then moved her into the big box that Josephine I had 

occupied, and gave her two of the latter’s puppies. Josephine 


„AT growled horridly at them at first, but finally allowed them 


to suckle. However, when we moved her and the puppies 
back to her own box, her attitude changed swiftly, and when 
our backs were turned she bit them, not severely, but just 
enough to show she was not taken in by this deception. 

But after we had cleaned out her crate, freshened it and 
moved it to a new place, she appeared to be reconciled to the 
loss of her own puppies, and pleased with the new ones. 

Owen finished the library this morning, and it is fine. 


Monday 
March tiy 
Little America 


The Trail Party has weathered the storm and cold, though 
with considerable discomfort. Vaughan reports that he has 
run out of flags, and asks that the Fairchild be sent out to 
drop more, as well as candles and alpine rope. If weather 
permits, we shall do it. Haines, however, thinks it will be 
impossible. The barometer is falling rapidly. 

Vaughan asked for instructions. I suggested that he use 
his own judgment. I have great faith in the good sense and 
discretion of these fellows, and believe that if allowed to work 
out their own solutions to their particular problems, they will 
be much better off. 

Gould radioed that he wanted to return today. Conditions 
here were favorable, but changed suddenly in the mountains. 
Before they could start, a snow storm came up and they were 
forced to postpone the start. 

The weather is up to all kinds of peculiar tricks. Haines 
told me that he had never seen such rapid changes in the 
wind’s direction as preceded the last storm. The barometer 
during the storm had the worst drop I have ever seen; Haines, 
himself, confessed he had never seen it so low. The graph of 
it looks like several steep hills. 


I have had a conference with Rucker and Van der Veer 


INCIDENT ON ROCKEFELLER MOUNTAINS 171 


relative to the taking of motion pictures. They have again 
requested more freedom in the taking of pictures. They 
claimed that I kept them so busy with work about the camp 
that they have had little or no time for their photographic 
duties. God knows, we can ill spare extra hands now, but I 
assured them I would try to give them more freedom. 

There is an old proverb to the effect that one picture is 
worth 10,000 words; I suppose that one good picture of the 
Antarctic is worth at least a dozen snow houses. Van der 
Veer and Rucker are craftsmen in their line, but unfortu- 
nately we have a greater need of snow houses than of pictures 
at this time. 

We are having an interesting time with the two Josephines. 
Josephine I missed her two puppies today, and sallied forth to 
claim them. She retreated, however, when Josephine II 
showed fight, and fell back on strategy. She waited until her 
rival left the crate to get meat, then cautiously entered the box 
and tried to coax her puppies back. Josephine II happened to 
return in the midst of the affair, and at once drove off the dis- 
tracted mother. I think we shall have peace now. 

The recent storm created sastrugi all over the nearby 
Barrier, depriving us of every safe landing place within miles. 
At first we were greatly exercised by this, fearing that con- 
ditions would not improve and that the landing of the Fokker 
would therefore be attended by considerable risk. However, 
heavy snow fell last night and smoothed out the disturbances. 
Our landing fields are not at all permanent; they are good one 
day and bad the next. I have asked Gould not to attempt 
to return, however, until we notify him a safe landing area has 
been marked by flag. 


Tuesday 
March rath 
Little America 


Another blizzard is on. I cannot understand why we 
should be having such a spell of bad weather. We have already 
had as many blizzards as Amundsen had during the whole year 


he was here. 
All well with the field parties, but the good old City is 


172 LITTLE AMERICA 


apparently taking punishment again. The following radio was 
received today from Captain Melville: 


Comdr. Byrd: 

Our dead reckoning Noon position was Lat. 49° 49! S., Long. 
168° 12 E. Weather overcast, northwesterly gales, rough con- 
fused sea. Ship rolling and laboring under sail and steam. Bar. 
30. Temperature of air, 47, water, 54. Distance from Tairoa 
Head, 263 miles. All well. Regards. 4 P.M. 


Later : 


Hove to in the throes of the heaviest gale of the passage. 


Wind 70 to 80 miles per hour with a terrific sea. 
MELVILLE. 


Vaughan reports that the Barrier continues smooth, and 
that a depot was laid 20 miles out. He believes he and the men 
can easily make 60 miles on this journey, but I told him that a 
depot at 40 miles would be quite enough. They are handi- 
‘capped by a shortage of flags. I suggested that they build 
snow beacons, made of blocks of snow. It will be a bother 
cutting out the blocks, and setting them up every two or three 
miles, but the added safety makes the extra effort very worth 
while. 

The storm that lashed the City very nearly ended her gal- 
lant career. From Berkner, on the 14th, there came the fol- 
lowing message: 


Comov. Byvo: 


We nearly didn’t have any City of New York after yester- 
day. Wind blew continuously at 70 and 80 miles per hour for 
the 24 hours, and toward evening waves were running as high 
as the lower topsail. None of the men had ever seen anything 
like it. Ship rolled terribly and did two rolls of 60 degrees or 
more. As a result, all batteries were dumped bottom side up in 
battery room, and broke all big tubes but three. AP floor plates 
in engine room shifted. One wave broke over boat and caused 
some damage. The starboard life boat tried to come through 
my port hole and smashed. Both rails were under water at the 
same time, and the wind was so strong you couldn’t stand on 


INCIDENT ON ROCKEFELLER MOUNTAINS 173 


deck. Wheelsman was lashed to the wheel after Percy Wallis 
was thrown clear over the spanker boom. He was slightly injured. 
The boiler was shifted a bit. Had bad time with salt water and 
battery acid in the battery room, but Shropshire and I went 
down promptly, rescued the batteries and lashed them to the 
floor. My lungs still sore. We had bad time and a lot of damage 
was caused to deck works. My shack shifted so had to take a 
guarter of an inch from door to get it cleared. 


The City rode it out, however, in her indomitable and 
stubborn way, and reached port several days later. 

Our concern now shifted to the Rockefellers, where Gould 
and his companions awaited favorable weather. As the days 
slipped by, without favoring them, our apprehensions mounted. 
When we had good weather at Little America, they had storm. 
And on the few occasions when it was clear at the moun- 
tains, we had blizzards. It began to appear that good condi- 
tions would never be had at both places at the same time; and 
with winter steadily approaching, this probability verged on 
being a certainty. The circumstances seemed to suggest a des- 
perate action—a flight in the face of unfavorable conditions. 
We were not yet ready to attempt that. It would be a last 
resort. 

The dog teams came in during the night of March 13. The 
men were tired and hungry, having made a day’s run of 50 
miles, but otherwise were in splendid condition. They had 
endured a week of constant storm and cold without a single 
case of frost bite. This augured well for the more prolonged 
journeys during the following spring. 

Vaughan reported that the teams made their way across 
the crevasses south of the Bay of Whales with the men roped 
together. The first night they made camp a few miles to the 
south. The next day a 60-mile blizzard struck at them out of 
a dead calm, forcing them to remain in their tents all day. 
They waited a day and a half in the hope the plane would be 
able to bring them needed supplies, then pressed on, most of the 
time in blinding drift. 

“Tt was very confusing,’ Vaughan said. “At times we 
could not see more than 20 yards in any direction. We had 
several days of low temperatures, 20° below in fact, but by 


174 LITTLE AMERICA 


moving fast we managed to keep quite warm. The dogs stood 
up very well, and gave no trouble. They were in such fine 
condition that, after laying the last base, we decided to make a 
go of the whole return journey, with only quick stops for 
meals.” 

The following depots were made and the following supplies 
cached : 

20 mile depot, 180 pounds dog food, 50 pounds man food, 
8 pounds clothing, and one lobster pot tent. 

40 mile depot, 300 pounds dog food, 100 pounds man food, 
8 pounds clothing, one lobster pot tent, and one primus stove. 

44 mile depot, 300 pounds dog food, 371 pounds man 
food, 8 pounds clothing, two lobster pot tents, one primus 
stove, two pairs snowshoes, two ice hatchets, one hatchet and 
one sledge runner. 

The greater part of these supplies were to be picked up 
and carried forward during the prolonged journeys planned 
for the following spring. 

There was no word from Gould on the 15th. Nor the 16th. 
Nor the 17th. And on the 17th, which was a Saturday, I be- 
came genuinely alarmed. The absence of radio communica- 
tion was peculiarly confusing. June had two complete radio 
sets—the standard set on the plane, and an emergency set. How 
both of them could be out of commission, unless the plane had 
crashed, was difficult to understand. But how they could have 
crashed was no less perplexing. It had been definitely agreed 
that the Fokker would not start until we radioed a favorable 
weather report, which we had not been able to do. It was im- 
possible to believe, then, that a start had been made. But 
there, on the other hand, was the silence. How could it be 
explained ? 

We cudgeled heads over it night and day, and though our 
reasoning pointed directly to the cause of the silence, we never 
once suspected it. Only a crash could have disabled both sets 
beyond repair. We could safely suppose Gould had not started. 
We could assume he and his party were in distress. But not 
once did we have the wits to see what lay crystal clear in the 
logic. We beat around the Antarctic bush apa stirred up 
nothing but reckless theories. 


Thursday, I began to prepare for a flight of investigation. 


INCIDENT ON ROCKEFELLER MOUNTAINS 175 


The Fairchild was made ready for flight. The sun shone sul- 
lenly through thickish clouds, and there was a chance the 
weather would improve. But it became worse instead. Friday 
and Saturday were unfit for flying. There was still no word 
from Gould. Sunday I came to the conclusion every resource 
must be brought into action. The winter night was danger- 
ously near. Every day was growing shorter and colder. I 
called the dog drivers into conference, and ordered them to 
make ready at once for a trip to the mountains. Thus, if 
conditions failed to improve for flying (and there was every 
reason to believe they would grow steadily worse) the respon- 
sibility of finding the Mountain Party must rest with the dog 
teams. Rather than defer their start in the hope of getting 
better weather, I decided to send them off as soon as the teams 
could be made ready. It would be well, too, I thought, to have 
them in the field in case anything happened to the relief plane. 

Walden was put in charge of this party. De Ganahl, navi- 
gator, Vaughan, Crockett, Bursey and Siple volunteered to go 
with him. They were to carry enough rations for three 
months. 

The mystery that held Gould’s party was further confused 
by lack of information bearing upon its position. In his first 
message, Gould said they had landed at the base of Chips 
Gould Mountain, which would place them at the northern- 
most peak. But a subsequent position indicated very definitely 
that they were at the foot of one of the southernmost peaks. 
As the latter position was most likely the true one, I decided to 
set our course for it, when and if we started. 

Meanwhile, the radio men continued to keep an emergency 
schedule with the party, sending frequent weather reports. 
Every hour we repeated a message that the Fairchild would 
fly at the first break in the weather, on the theory that June’s 
equipment might be able to pick up messages even if it could 
not send. This vigil in the radio shack was unbroken. But 
the ether yielded not a trace of the beleaguered party. 

Late Monday the weather appeared to grow better, and I 
gave orders to have the engine started. For the first time, it 
failed to turn over. The fault lay, we learned, in the primer. 
We hastened to remedy it. Just as the mechanics finished, the 
sky clouded over, the wind rose and the horizon filled with 


176 LITTLE AMERICA 


dense clouds. This was a bitter disappointment. One was 
helpless in the face of such misfortune. 

The long-awaited “break” came in the afternoon of Mon- 
day, March 19. A small hole opened up in the cloud banks 
to the east, and widened gradually. A patch of blue sky 
showed through. A 22 mile wind stirred up some drift, but 
we could not expect everything. I conferred with Haines in 
the library. He was not very encouraging. He said: “F rankly, 
I consider a take-off dangerous. But it may be the best chance 
you will have this season. About one chance in three, I should 
say, that you will find good weather all the way. Damn it, 
you can’t tell what this weather will do, anyway.” 

As long as the chance was there, we took it. 

The Fairchild was on the line, and the mechanics were 
heating the engine with a torch when I came out to the field. 
Flame hissed and roared up the throat of the canvas funnel. 
which carried the blast of hot air into the hood which covered 
the entire block. Then hot oil was poured into the engine, the 
mechanics stepped outside, the inertia starter began its mount- 
ing, high-pitched whine, and in a moment the engine turned 
over musically. 

The plane was moved into position with some difficulty, 
having become frozen to the snow in which it laid so long. The 
Barrier was far from smooth when we faced the plane’s nose 
into the wind. Smith studied it with a practiced eye. “We 
ought to be able to get off,” he said. “It all depends upon the 
strength of the skis.” He smiled slowly. “Lets try it, any- 


2 


way. 

We took Hanson along as radio engineer. 

Just about five o’clock, we started down the snow runway. 
The bumping was wicked, and the shock of the skis striking 
the sastrugi caused the whole plane to shiver. But we rose 
finally in a flurry of snow and headed straight for the moun- 
tains. 

The hour was later than I had wanted: It was quite dark 
at night from to o'clock on. But beggars can’t be choosers : 
we took what Providence offered, and were thankful. 

It was a bit chilly in the plane, 10° below zero, and we were 
bundled up in heavy clothing. 


The sun was behind us, and I could see it occasionally, a 


THE FOKKER ON A FROZEN LAKE at Its BASE IN THE ROCKEFELLER 
MOUNTAINS. 


VICTIM OF THE WIND’S FURY. 
The Wreck of the Fokker, 


i i ت ی‎ E 


INCIDENT ON ROCKEFELLER MOUNTAINS 177 


dull red disc surrounded by orange streaks. I laid a straight 
compass course for the southern end of the Rockefellers, to 
the position which Gould had radioed. The horizon was a 
blurred grayness, which presently gave way to masses of low 
clouds. It was one of the worst “fying” skies I had ever seen. 
The clouds were miles away, but seemed very near, and merged 
without a shadow to show where the horizon met the snow. 
The instinctive response of a pilot would be to fly lower and 
lower, trying to get underneath these clouds. Smith, however, 
kept his head and flew a straight, steady compass course. 
There was not enough sun to use the more dependable sun com- 
pass, and we had to place our reliance on the magnetic compass 
which was not particularly reliable. 

The clouds soon closed in behind us, and we lost sight of 
the sun. Things became quite dim, a confused, dirty gray 
nothingness, through which we raced at a speed of 100 miles 
per hour. 

We studied the surface constantly searching for the plane, 
in the belief that it might have actually started from the 
Rockefellers and been forced down. Once Smith pointed out 
a dark spot on the snow which, at a distance, bore some resem- 
blance to a plane, but we saw presently that it was a yawning 
crevasse. 

Shortly after 6 o’clock, we sighted, dead ahead, a moun- 
tain. Was it the one near which Gould was camped? The other 
peaks slowly lifted their heads, and in the murk they were no 
more than vague, pale gray mounds. We approached the first 
peak at an altitude of 2,000 feet. 

It was now dim, but we could see sheets of drift weaving 
across the snow, which indicated a stiff wind. Smith stared 
down, and moved his hand around, to show the whirling 
character of the drift. “Pretty tough to land in that,” he 
shouted. I thought so, too, but said nothing. 

There was the more dreadful possibility we should not 
be able to see anything. A shattered plane and three men 
would not offer a very conspicuous landmark in a mass of 
dark ridges. 

We flew over the mountain, circled it and then approached 
it again. We searched out the slopes, the valleys and the 
peak, but saw nothing. Could it be that Gould’s position was 


178 LITTLE AMERICA 


inaccurate? If we failed to find them here, then we faced 
the heart-breaking task of combing 70 miles of mountain 
peaks. A more hopeless task I could not imagine. 

A second survey gave up no traces of the party. I was 
about to order Smith to turn north to search the other peaks 
when suddenly he touched my arm, and pointed to the south. 
I saw a column of smoke bending indistinctly on the wind, 
then the flashing of a light. The first thought that came 
into my head was: Thank God, at least one of them is alive. 

We swung over the light, and started to spiral down. 
Soon we could make out a landing “T” marked out with 
flags. We were apparently descending into a large basin at 
the foot of the mountain. In the dimness one had the sensa- 
tion of dropping powerlessly into a porcelain bowl. The 
field, even from our altitude, appeared to be excessively rough. 
What seemed to be large lumps, two to four feet in diameter, 
spotted it. The pedestal of the landing “T” ran straight 
through them. But it looked bad, very bad. 

“Shall I land?” asked Smith. One thing was certain, we 
could not fly another minute around that bowl. Visibility 
was much too bad. Another thing: Balchen and June would 
not have placed that landing “T” on dangerous ice. 

I nodded my head. 

He glanced again at the ugly surface, made a wry face 
and then throttled down cautiously for a landing. 

I now caught sight of a small tent, and about three 
quarters of a mile away the outline of the plane. Its grotesque 
attitude showed quite plainly that it had crashed. 

We came in with a thud, bouncing on a wretched surface, 
with Smith nursing his engine and solicitous for the limita- 
tions of his skis—an excellent and daring landing. 

As the plane came to a halt in a smother of snow, I 
jumped out, with Hanson just behind. At first I saw no 
one, and my heart sank. Then a figure came racing toward 
the plane—that gait could belong only to a Navy man, June: 
then I saw a man of bristling red whiskers advancing in our 
direction. No other face on the planet supported such a 
growth. Balchen’s, of course. But where was Larry? Ina 
moment I saw him as well. He, too, was on his way to the 
OJace, but his progress was casual, and he was the academician 


INCIDENT ON ROCKEFELLER MOUNTAINS 179 


to the very end—making the dignified entrance of a professor 
who happened, let us say, to breakfast late and found his class 
already in noisy session. It was so very much in character 
that I had to smile. 

Even if I was capable of doing it adequately, which I 
am not, I would hesitate to describe my emotions at finding 
them safe and sound. However, the reunion appeared to 
bring joy to every one. 

I asked Smith to keep the engine idling. With less than 
an hour and one-half before darkness, we could not afford 
to waste much time in conversation on the ice. Balchen and 
June were ordered to take Hanson’s place and mine in the 
Fairchild, and return with Smith to the base. There was the 
inevitable dispute over who would stay behind, a gratifying 
demonstration of generosity on the part of every man, but I 
was fortunately able to enforce my decision. 

We removed from the plane some food and a small sledge. 
Then Smith gave the Fairchild the gun, and it whirled off. 
Soon we lost sight of it in the gathering twilight. 


March 19 
Tuesday 
Rockefeller Mountains 


We have just finished an excellent supper which Larry 
cooked, and in a very few minutes I shall make use of June’s 
sleeping bag. It is snug here in the tent, and I am peaceful 
in mind for the first time in many days. A few minutes 
ago we received word by radio of the safe arrival of the Fair- 
child at Little America. If weather permits, they will come 
out for us tomorrow. 

We're pope too optimistic about that. Tomorrow I shall 
discuss with Larry the idea of walking home. It will be a 
long and wretched walk, and I cannot say that I look forward 
to it. 

The first thing I did after the plane took off was to find 
the reason for the rough appearance of the landing place. The 
spots turned out to be patches of solid green ice showing 
through the snow. The basin in which we lie is, in fact, a 
frozen lake—very different from anything we have seen 
around Little America. 


180 LITTLE AMERICA 


I now have the story of this episode—part of it from 
Larry, part of it from June and Balchen, in the hurried talk 
before they left. 

They reached here after two hours and ten minutes of 
flying. Like us, they were confused on landing by poor visi- 
bility. In their case, they tried to land downward on a steep 
slope, and when Balchen levelled off the plane was still in 
the air. Actually, he had to land at a gliding angle, and it 
was not a gentle one. I realize now what a perfectly fine job 
Dean Smith did. 

They taxied up the slope, which leads up to a kind of 
terrace at the foot of the mountain, secured the plane with 
ice anchors, and made their camp. Gould dug a ski into the 
snow, and June used it as a radio pole. 

March Sth, the next day, a stiff wind blew, and that, com- 
bined with the cold, prevented much work out of doors. On 
the following day, they laid a base line about a mile from the 
tent, and by triangulation Gould fixed the positions of the 
various peaks in the neighborhood. That done, they made a 
reconnaissance part way up the face of the nearest mountain, 
and gathered several fragments of rock for geological 
examination. ` 

This, I judge, was about the end of good weather during 
their stay. 

The wind thereafter blew constantly. 

In a severe wind, the propeller revolved steadily, despite 
natural compression and the stiffness of frozen oil in the parts. 
As the wind strengthened, the wing lifted with it, and the 
lift was sufficient to raise the skis four or five inches from 
the snow. 

Saturday, the roth, brought snow and a stiff wind. Too 
bad to do any work, so they stayed in their sleeping bags 
until tt o'clock. The wind rose steadily, and the breaking 
of the tent guys that had been secured to the airplane skis 
brought them tumbling out of the tent. 

They found the ship banging up and down on the ski 
pedestals. Frantically, they began to pile snow blocks, which 
they cut out with knives from a nearby drift, on the skis, to 
keep them down. 


The wind died down, and they were able to finish the 


INCIDENT ON ROCKEFELLER MOUNTAINS 181 


anchorage with some comfort. Then, without warning, the 
wind rose again, more fiercely than ever. The plane began 
to move once more, and they were hard put to it to keep it 
from carrying them away. The difficulty lay in the fact that 
the plane rested on firm ice, and it was hard to get a firm 
hold on it. 

When they tried to anchor the left wing, the force of the 
wind fairly battered down their combined efforts. Several 
times, according to Gould, strong gusts lifted all three of 
them clear of the ground, while they held on to the wing, and 
swept their bodies almost parallel to the ground. It was 
numbing cold, and Gould said the driving snow hit the face 
with the bite of red-hot needles. Snow caught on their eyelids 
and froze. 

“We could lean op the wind when we shovelled,” June 
told me, “apa if we didn’t hurry, it whipped the blocks of 
snow from the shovel. We were constantly bombarded with 
lumps of snow carried down from the mountains, and believe 
me, they hurt.” 

How long did this keep up? “Hours and hours,” Larry 
says, “we lost track of time.” 

The wind brought a rising temperature, the snow softened 
and to add to their misery, their clothing, their tent and their 
sleeping bags became soaking wet. 

The barometer, Larry said, dropped more than an inch 
within four or five hours—incredible! 

Toward midnight there was a lull, and they crept into 
their sleeping bags, to gain what little comfort and warmth 
there was in them. The wind rose again, and they returned 
to the battle, painfully cutting out lumps of snow and dump- 
ing them on the skis. They would creep out on their bellies, 
cut out a block, and then, when they stood up, the wind would 
hurl them back to the plane. Balchen worked like a madman, 
and his strength helped to stave off the final blow for hours. 

Although the plane banged about, the guy wires held. 
Toward morning, Gould, Balchen and June crept back to the 
tent. They could do no more. The issue was in the laps of 
the gods. When they turned in, the wind was still on the 
make, and the din, Larry said, was awful. 

Sunday morning the wind slackened, then freshened in 


182 LITTLE AMERICA 


the afternoon, only to subside in the evening. They decided 
to return to Little America as soon as the weather improved. 

Monday, the 12th, more wind, and the situation was so 
ominous Gould ordered them to remove the foodstuffs from 
the plane. It snowed a bit, and the barometer registered 
28.6. Tuesday was calm, but with an overcast sky. They 
climbed the mountain, located all the peaks in the range by 
triangulation, and from the summit glimpsed the new moun- 
tains we had discovered in the distance. 

Wednesday, the 14th, wind averaged 35 miles per hour, 
with gusts up to 60. Incidentally, these blows came mostly 
from the north, and slightly west of north. 

The next day was the worst of all. “Never saw anything 
like it,” June said. “When I got in the plane to keep the 
radio schedule, the needle on the air speed indicator touched 
88 m.p.h., and though she only banged up and down on the 
snow, the ship was certainly going through all the motions 
of flying. I looked out and saw Larry hanging on to a rope 
attached to one of the wing tips. He was blown straight out, 
like a flag. The prop was turning over very fast, and the 
lines on the ‘dead men’ were so taut you could play a tune 
on them. Mind you, the wind then was only working up to 
bigger and better things. It blew so hard afterwards that 
Larry refused to let me enter the plane, to keep the regular 
10:30 o’clock schedule. We could hardly breathe.” 

The end came suddenly, while they were in the tent. A 
gust, in contrast with which the others were breezes, carried 
away all the lines. The plane burst clear, rose into flight and 
flew backwards for half a mile, then crashed upon the ice, a 
complete wreck. Balchen, a man who never gives up, battled 
against the wind to reach it, and came back with the news they 
had verified with their own eyes—the Fokker would never fly 
again. 

Gould believes the wind reached a velocity of 150 m.p.h. 
(in gusts) and June said; “when it stopped it was so quiet that 
p yd 

The wind dropped off the following day, and they went 
out to the Fokker. June reassembled the emergency radio 
set, which was rather badly battered, and tried to raise the 


INCIDENT ON ROCKEFELLER MOUNTAINS 183 


base. He could hear the base operators sending, but appar- 
ently could not reach them. 

The worst blow of all fell when the crankshaft on the 
generator broke. They could still hear with the set, but all 
hope of getting word of their predicament to the base was 
ended. It was the most depressing thing in the world, accord- 
ing to Larry, to sit in the shattered fuselage, and hear Little 
America discussing our absence with operators in New York, 
and not be able to send the explanation a mere 125 miles. 

They were considering trying to walk back when June 
received the message saying that the Fairchild would be flown 
out with the first good weather. So they waited out the lonely 
days in their tent, never too confident that the weather could 
allow us to come. 

Well, for all but Gould, the vigil is over. We shall now 
take up our own. 


The next day, Wednesday, March 2oth, I walked out to 
the plane, and saw how badly smashed it was. I was sur- 
prised to see that, save for the tips, the wing was undamaged. 
The plane had apparently landed on the skis. The ski 
pedestals, however, were split open, one ski lay clear of the 
plane, and the struts were bent and torn. The tail section 
was broken, the fuselage was ripped open and the cabin 
exposed. It seemed as if a great bird had come to grief, and 
this was its pathetic and broken carcass. 

What interested me most was the propeller. All three 
blades were curled—unfailing evidence of a power crash. 
Beyond a doubt, the propeller was whirling when the Fokker 
made her uncanny flight. What a weird sight that must have 
been! 

Little America reported bad weather, and when it showed 
no signs of improving I instructed McKinley, who was then 
in charge of operations there, to send out the dog teams. 
Gould and I decided to start walking until we met the dog 
teams. We piled a month’s supply of food on the hand sledge, 
made a sledge sail out of canvas, which would help us along 
when the wind was right, and prepared to start within two 
days, if the plane was not already on its way. 


184 LITTLE AMERICA 


Thursday 
March 2r 


Weather continues bad at Little America, but it is fine 
here. The dog teams started yesterday, and are making 
excellent time. If the Fairchild is not able to start, they 
ought to reach here within ten days or so. 

The teams are divided into two groups—a supporting 
party consisting of teams driven by Walden, Braathen and 
Siple, which is carrying supplies to 40-Mile Depot, and the 
regular relief group, consisting of four teams driven by 
Vaughan, Bursey, Goodale and Thorne, with Petersen as 
radioman and de Ganahl as navigator. 

At 40-MPe Depot the supporting party will drop their 
loads and return to the base, but the relief group will strike 
due east for the mountains. 

There is a great deal of melting in the immediate vicinity 
of these mountains during the summer months, and the basin 
in which we are camped consists of several hundred feet of 
solid ice. The terrific winds have blown some of the surface 
clear, and these patches are as smooth as glass. When the 
sun strikes this at a certain angle, the ice assumes a pale 
green color. 

Larry is an excellent cook. His “hoosh” is fit for the 
gods. It is a mixture of pemmican, bacon and pea soup. As 
a steady diet, though, I imagine it would soon begin to pall. 

This is a cold place. The temperature gets down to nearly 
30° below at night, and about three o’clock in the morning 
the sleeping bags become chilly. 


Later 

Weather continues bad at the base. 

We seem to be camped in an area of solid ice. Last night, 
when the temperature dropped, the air resounded with the 
sound of sharp reports, caused by the abrupt cracking of ice. 
Two bursts sounded loudly under the tent—under our sleep- 
ing bags, it seemed—and we all awakened with a start, 
wondering what new misfortune was in store for us. We 
shivered awhile in the cold, but the disturbances, which 
sounded like a sustained burst of rifle fire, moved farther 
away. We fell into fitful sleep. 


INCIDENT ON ROCKEFELLER MOUNTAINS 185 


Larry has done a very fine job here, and his report ought 
to bring out some important findings. He is convinced that 
Amundsen’s “Carmen Land” does not extend this far north. 
If the snow were to disappear, he believes a shallow sea or 
basin would enfold the southern bases of the Rockefellers,! 
perhaps isolating several of the peaks. 

I was astonished to learn he had been able to sight from 
the range the mountain peak we sighted to the eastward on 
our last flight. According to his rough measurements, the 
nearest peaks are over 50 miles away. The taller peaks, he 
believes, are about 5,000 feet high. He could make out the 
peak very distinctly. It was his first thought that these peaks 
are landmarks of a far more extensive glaciation than now 
prevails, which would forge another link in the chain of evi- 
dence proving the waning character of the ice age. If Carmen 
Land does exist, and if it does have a counterpart, then it is 
very possible that these mountains to the East are its limits. 

However, we shall be able to determine these things 
with some preciseness next summer. 

Today we went out to the small crevasses which surround 
this basin to the west and marked a trail through them with 
flags for the dog teams if they ever arrive. We also found 
a much better flying field to the west, and marked it with a 
landing “T.” 

I find myself in a most extraordinary position. Although 
beyond the reach of immediate assistance, G am able to direct 
my affairs with some flexibility, thanks to the radio. Since 
stuck on this lake, I have been in touch with the ships in 
Dunedin, my office in New York, the base and the dog teams 
on the trail. Matters are progressing smoothly. 

Haines reported tonight the weather is clearing, and the 
plane may be able to start tomorrow. It cannot come too 
quickly to please us. I have asked Smith to bring June with 
him. It would be murderous to ask a pilot to fly a single- 
engined plane alone over this wilderness. A speck of dirt 
in the carburetor would mean his death. He could not 

1McKinley’s photographs using Gould’s fixes of position definitely 1o- 
cated the Rockefeller Mts. as a group of more or less isolated peaks and 
ridges beginning roughly in Lat. 78° 14’ S., Long. 155° 15’ W. and extending 


in crescentic shape to Lat. 77° 35’ S., and Long. 153° 5’ W., with the cres- 
cent opening to the west. There are at least 40 peaks in the group. 


186 LITTLE AMERICA 


possibly make his way home alone after a forced landing. 
Now the question arises: Can the Fairchild hold five men? 
Even with three it is crowded. This problem we can meet 
when it arises. 


About 5 o’clock in the morning of the 22nd, Hanson was 
informed by Little America that the Fairchild was on its 
way and an hour and a half later we sighted it. Smith landed 
it neatly. But joy over its arrival was soon forgotten in the 
larger question: How many could return? Who would re- 
main behind until yet another flight could be made? 

“Hop ip,” Smith shouted, “Boot for every one. Next 
train leaves in six months.” 

The door slammed open, but neither Hanson or Gould 
moved. The same doubt was in the mind of both of them, 
and each was unwilling that he should not be the last to enter. 

But as we had to learn, first of all, whether it would be 
necessary for any one to be left behind, I prevailed upon 
them to enter. The cabin, already crowded with equipment, 
appeared to be jammed. But at last I squeezed in, burrowing 
over furs and food, June slammed tight the door, Smith 
taxied into the wind, and lifted the ship in a climbing turn. 

It was truly good to see the Barrier moving under us. 

We sighted the dog teams 55 miles east of Little America, 
travelling fast. About 5 miles astern we could see the depot, 
marked by flags, which they had laid in accordance with 
instructions. Smith brought the plane down over the drivers, 
porpoised to show that he had the mountain party in the 
plane and that the teams were to return, a signal previously 
agreed upon, and then we raced for home. 

Even from an altitude of 2,000 feet, the trail stood out 
clear and distinct on the Barrier, and we could follow it with 
ease. 

We reached Little America at about an hour and 15 
minutes later, and so far as we were concerned, the incident 
of the Rockefeller Mountains was over. Sunday morning, the 
dog teams came in, having marched all night and made a 
record march in the Antarctic of 63 miles? in temperature 


*The longest previous march in the Antarctic was made by Amundsen 
when they covered 62 miles. “The South Pole 1, 222 


INCIDENT ON ROCKEFELLER MOUNTAINS 187 


which dropped as low as 40° below zero. Balchen made a 
flight to the Ross Sea and reported it frozen over as far as 
the eye could see. The aviation season was over. 

We were truly fortunate to escape the Ides of March as 
easily as we did. March was the worst month on Haines’ 
calendar. Eight severe blizzards! marked it, more than 
occurred in any other month during our stay, and the snow- 
fall was almost twice as heavy as in the nearest period, June, 
which was the middle of the Antarctic winter. Nor is that 
all. March was She cloudiest of all months. Haines’ charts 
show that during its 31 days, there was only one clear day. 
Eight were partly cloudy and twenty-two very cloudy, which, 
in view of the awful conditions of visibility the slightest 
cloudiness brings, may indicate how very closely we pressed 
our good luck in bringing the incident to its end. 


*The meteorological staff identified a storm as a blizzard only when 
severe enough to reduce visibility to a few yards. 


CHAPTER IX 
WINTER—BIRTH OF A CITY 


WITE the units of the expedition together once more, we 
were willing to relinquish the entire Antarctic Continent to 
winter, save for the few yards that we had laboriously con- 
verted to our devices. Even the surface above these we were 
willing to give up, in favor of the more protected, warmer 
catacombs we had hewn underneath. We burrowed deeper. 
Everything that was movable was sunk into deep holes, and 
blizzards swiftly covered these. A hangar made of snow 
blocks was built about the Fairchild, and it disappeared with 
its wings folded back as if in resignation and its engine 
shrouded in a bulky canvas jacket. It would lie there, with a 
tarpaulin for its roof, until spring. 

We then set about making a home for the Ford. An im- 
mense hole was dug, with a steep decline approaching it. With 
sixty dogs pulling at once, we dragged the fuselage into the 
center of the colony. The mechanics, Bubier, Roth and Demas, 
worked like fiends to finish the job. 

Now all that remained was to get this huge bird into its 
nest. 

First, we hitched a line to the snowmobile, which had 
shown a remarkable aptitude for hauling. Then half the camp 
was mustered into service and distributed at the ends of other 
lines. We heaved, we pulled, we dug in until the pressure of 
the lines cut in through heavy jackets. The monster followed 
grudgingly, then at last it plunged head foremost into its 
hangar—the coldest hangar! in the world. The tail was packed 
in snow, but about the nose we built a capacious chamber out 


1 
| Those two hangars were named the Guggenheim Hangars, after my 
friend, Mr. Harry Guggenheim. 


188 


WINTER—BIRTH OF A CITY 189 


of snow blocks so that the mechanics might continue to work 
‚op the engines. 

Only two major tasks remained undone out of doors. 

Part of the supplies were still in the Barrier cache. But 
these were soon brought in by men working under the direction 
of Captain McKinley. March blizzards made a hard task 
harder. Dense drift and snow repeatedly covered the cache, 
so that it was necessary for the men to spend half the day 
shovelling before they could even begin to move the stuff. 
After one heavy storm, I became worried that part of the 
buried supplies might never be found, and insisted that the 
entire area be carefully excavated. Here was carrying coals to 
Newcastle with a vengeance. There was much good-natured 
grousing over the order, enlivened by a steady stream of rail- 
lery from Taffy Davies and Cyclone Haines. Taffy had 
been digging for some time, without once uncovering any- 
thing, which Haines intimated was due largely to the fact 
he was simply letting the wind blow the snow off his shovel; 
so he regarded it as a vindication when his shovel struck some- 
thing hard. Taffy whooped, and yelled for assistance. Snow 
flew merrily for a few minutes. Then Taffy dragged out 
the prize. The most unpopular device this side of the equator 
lay exposed. 

“And I had to do it—snow shovels,” he groaned. He let 
the bundle drop into the pit and covered his eyes. 

The second task involved the acquisition of a last 50 tons 
of seal meat. Strom and Braathen were sent down to the 
Bay, and finally secured 32 seals. These were discovered far 
out on the edge of the newly-formed bay ice. All the other 
seal holes were empty, their inhabitants having retreated before 
winter. In fact, nearly all wild life had departed. Only a 
lone Emperor penguin and two skua gulls on the quest for 
garbage were seen. We should therefore have to get along 
with the meat we had. 

We could then begin to see the end of work about the 
camp. All the huts were up, and the men were excavating 
a series of tunnels for the dogs. Our own tunnel system 
promised to be so effective that we decided to give the same 
protection to the dogs. The main tunnels ran west of the 
mess hall, and consisted of three long corridors in the snow 


190 LITTLE AMERICA 


radiating from the main chamber called the chopping house. 
The chopping house had an entrance to the seal pile, which 
was then covered with snow. Fortunately, refrigeration 15 
not a problem in the Antarctic. The carcasses became as stiff 
as steel plate as soon as they were hauled there. One of the 
tunnels opened into a small chamber which was called the 
maternity ward. With six females in camp, a number of 
blessed events were a reasonable certainty. Siple also made 
use of another tunnel as an approach to his taxidermy 
station. He dug a deep hole nearby, roofed it with an over- 
turned life boat and connected it to the tunnel with a narrow 
corridor. This area was given the name of Dog Town, and 
it was the noisiest township on the whole southern hemi- 
sphere. 

A second set of tunnels extended prong-like from 
Braathen’s and Walden’s house, which was fast becoming a 
celebrated residential quarter. They made their own chopping 
house, which they merged with a repair shop for skis and 
sledges, and presently had several leading industries housed 
under one roof. These tunnels were eight feet deep, and about 
six feet wide, and at intervals of six feet or more little alcoves 
were let into the sides to receive the crates. Digging these 
tunnels was a back-breaking order. For the housing of 80 
primitive dogs involves its own problems. Unlike brow-beaten 
humans, who can be herded into groups without grievous 
friction, Eskimo dogs remain individualists to the last. 
They may dwell in the peaceful affinity of brothers for days 
on end; but for the favor of a lady or a hunk of frozen seal 
meat they will enthusiastically rend one another limb from 
limb. We had had half a dozen bloody brawls, due to the 
fact that some dogs were allowed to roam loose, partly because 
of carelessness or inexperience on the part of the drivers; and 
during this period two splendid dogs, Shackleton and Muskeg, 
were killed in a pitched battle over a female. 

The crates, then, had to be sufficiently spaced apart to 
allow the dogs to move freely on a chain, and not near enough 
to permit them to come within fighting distance. We there- 
fore staggered them on opposite sides of the tunnels. 

It would be well to tell here the story of Spy. Spy 
was one of Vaughan’s dogs. Toward the end of March I 


WINTER—BIRTH OF A CITY 101 


found him in his crate, in a pitiful condition. He had pulled 
his heart out during the unloading, and now was so lame he 
could hardly walk. For some strange reason his coat failed 
to grow in thick, as with the other dogs, so his resistance to 
cold was low. Vaughan, who loved him as a brother, was 
of the opinion he should be shot: it would put him out of his 
misery. But it was decided to bring him into the house, where 
it was warm, and put him on a special diet. 

We gave him canvas to sleep on. The only avaiiable space 
in the camp at the time was in my room, and old Spy lay there 
for two days, very much to the disgust of Igloo who attacked 
him whenever my back was turned. His joints were so 
crippled by cold that he could not stir, but he was on the mend. 
Saturday, March goth, we took him out for a bit of exercise. 
It happened that his old team went by, with black Dinty in 
the lead, and his boon companions, Watch and Moody, in 
the traces. Spy watched them go rollicking past, and a spirit 
like that of the Old Guard must have taken possession of his 
pain-stiffened limbs, for he went out in a gallant spurt, over- 
took the team and with a final summoning up of strength 
forced his way to his place in the team. 

It was one of the most beautiful things I have ever seen: 
and for a penny I would pluck a moral from it. The whole 
camp stopped working at the sight, and watched with wonder 
how Moody and Watch muzzled the veteran, and laid their 
paws on him in a most extraordinary gesture. That these wild 
and untrammeled animals should be capable of harboring so 
deep and lasting a sentiment was beyond understanding. 

Spy gradually grew better and soon was sufficiently re- 
covered to return to his crate. This splendid old veteran 
lived long enough to do fine work in the spring. 


Tuesday 
April Ist 


We are getting a taste of Antarctic weather. Last night 
the temperature dipped to 47° below zero and today it is not 
much higher. Still digging tunnels. It is chilling work. 
There have been a number of cases of frost-bite, and we have 
been compelled to warn several of the men to Be careful. The 


192 LITTLE AMERICA 


distressing thing about this painful affliction is that it generally 
finds its victims in an innocent frame of mind, blissfully un- 
conscious of the harm done. We watch one another for the 
tell-tale patch of yellow-white on the cheeks and nose, and 
detecting them has become as insidious a game as beaver. 
“Beg your pardon, Mr. Haines, but I observe you have a 
frost-bite on your cheek.” “Thanks very much, Mr. Harri- 
son,” with a tender rubbing on the spot, “but you might look 
to your own with advantage.” 

There’s ap art in defeating frost-bite. If rubbed too 
vigorously, the tissue is injured. A gentle, delicate pressure 
—or rather working of the flesh that is attacked—is quite 
efficacious. This must be done with the bare hand, which 
adds a zestful element of hazard to the operation. Some of 
the boys consoled their faces so long that they soon nipped 
their fingers, and were jumping up and down like lunatics. 

The sun is still above the horizon, but sinking perceptibly 
every day. Its shadow effects are really marvellous. The 
slightest outcropping in the Barrier has a lengthening cone of 
violet and purple silhouette, and a man moving about is pur- 
sued by a shadow so immense and grotesque as to be positively 
embarrassing. i 

The sunsets are beautiful. They bedevil my mind strug- 
gling for adequate expression with so overpowering a sense of 
helplessness as to cause the best words to end in muddled 
indecision. 

I must bring up a subject that has been troubling me. 
Some time ago I decided to withhold Owen’s dispatches from 
the men. I had a definite reason for this. Publicity is the 
worst disease that a weak man can get. It nourishes dis- 
satisfaction, even jealousy. It can rend the most compactly 
organized group of men. Down here I had hoped to get 
away from that evil. If it were possible, I wanted to create 
a single attitude—a single state of mind—unfettered by the 
trivial considerations of civilization. That is, T wanted—and, 
in fact, shall persist in wanting—the task to be more important 
than the personal contribution to it. 

If I could have had my way, few names or all names 
would be mentioned in Owen’s stories. Every effort would 
be a collective undertaking. But of course such a thing cannot 


COMMANDER BYRD AT THE ENTRANCE OF THE HOLE LEADING TO THE 
ADMINISTRATION BUILDING. 


And Igloo, of course. 


WINTER—BIRTH OF A CITY 193 


be. Owen’s job is difficult enough as it is, without encum- 
_ bering him with limitations. No reporter who takes his art 
seriously, and Owen does, should be hampered in any way 
whatsoever, if it can possibly be avoided. News should be 
held inviolate. 

Then, too, the men must be considered. I suppose that 
of all the men here I have the least right to talk depreciatively 
of the value of getting one’s name in the newspapers; but I 
am certainly in a position to tell them that the privilege soon 
responds to the law of diminishing returns. With these men, 
however, the usual conditions are altered. Owen’s stories are 
an indirect connection with their families and friends. 
Naturally, this is an important consideration. 

What I do fear is the fact that the nature of the work the 
men must do, and are fitted to do, must of necessity give 
greater prominence to some than to others. There will be 
some who will receive scant mention, if any at all, in spite 
of the fact their work may be just as important to the expedi- 
tion as that of the others. It is no fault of Owen’s, but it 
is a pity it has to be. For I have striven to reduce all values 
to a common level, in which no job is meaner or more meritor- 
ious than the rest. If distinctions are drawn in the record, 
the whole plan must collapse. 

In a word, we are trying to get away from the false 
standards by which men live under more civilized conditions. 
The Antarctic is a new world for all of us which requires its 
own standards, and these are materially different from those 
set up in civilization, whereby we venerate prestige, influence 
and associated characteristics and ignore the inconspicuous, 
but equally valid properties. Now that vital operations have 
ceased for the winter, the hand is quite as important as the 
brain, and the digging out of house entrances and windows 
after a storm, the care of fires, etc., are prime factors in 
keeping alive. They are the essential things. This fact I 
have tried to drive home, not always with success. 

The men are, for the most part, of the volunteer type, 
proud, independent and ambitious. Every one of them is 
eager to participate in the scientific labors of the expedition, 
no matter how arduous they may be. Such work is obviously 
important; it provides its own incentive and fits into the 


194 LITTLE AMERICA 


standards that are venerated. The less conspicuous tasks they 
are inclined to swallow hard, and regard them as chores, I 
think, which might well be performed by professionals. But 
alas! if there was such a thing as a professional snow shoveller, 
fire tender, etc., they would have no place on an expedition. 
Moreover, the crux of the matter is that these presumably 
onerous tasks have become the vital things. I know, too, 
from experience that the volunteer type (1 do not mean that 
all the men are volunteers, but with most of them the pay 
certainly must be one of the last considerations) does not 
always bear up well when praise, prestige and rank are rammed 
down their throats. Their spirit is bound to be affected. 
Gould, McKinley, Balchen and Haines stand squarely with 
me on this point. 

However, now that there is more time for leisure it would 
be contrary to the principles of the expedition and high- 
handed of me to oppose the posting of the stories on the 
bulletin board. I am not at all sure that it will satisfy every 
one, but at any rate I shall do it. Merely seeing in black and 
white an account of what they have accomplished that day 
with their own hands and brains may convince them that it 
is not lost labor after all. 

But I shall quietly try to spread the word, as I have done 
before, that the Antarctic is no place for the spotlight. I+ 
casts only a faint glow 10,000 miles away. 


From time to time we had attempted to locate Amundsen’s 
old camp, but without success. We decided to try it again, 
and on March 11th, I went out with Davies, Strom, Balchen, 
Thorne, Van der Veer, Goodale, and Crockett to make a last 
search while the weather remained favorable. It was a cold 
day, 38° below zero and we were bundled up to twice natural 
size in furs, parkas and mittens. Only the nose and eyes were 
visible, and from the narrow opening in the hood one’s 
breath came out in clouds of vapor. We puffed like steam 
engines, 

To the best of our knowledge, Framheim was about three 
miles to the south of Little America. True, we should have 
great difficulty in trying to recognize anything, for the Ant- 
arctic 15 an area of eternal change; and in the 17 years 


GA WINTER—BIRTH OF A CITY 195 


Y 


ya» N 

that had intervened, Framheim must long since have disap- 
‚ peared under the snow. But we still had the idea that we 
. might stumble on it, and I refreshed my mind with Amund- 

< sen’s description of the place, and, in fact, carried with me 

maps and the chapter in his book describing its location. 

| There were two ways to reach the basin he described. It 

_ was possible to go down over the bay ice, then up a long 
slope to the Barrier. But the ice was so broken up with 
pressure to the west of Framheim that the trip was almost 
a hardship. The second lay over the Barrier. We chose the 
second. Walking briskly, we pursued a course that brought 
us up a rolling rise in the Barrier, whence we descended into 
the valley of haycocks, from which tiny threads of vapor 
arose. We threaded these, ascended to the high rolling Barrier 
and then through a pass which brought us at last to the basin. 
As we stood on the rim of the basin, we had a perfect view 
of the Barrier, which was like a burnished shield, with glints 
hidden in its depths. We could trace the serrated edges of the 
Barrier, enfolding the Bay of Whales in a series of capes, 
and what we took to be Amundsen’s Cape Man’s Head was 
the southernmost of these. Even it had changed, and there was 
nothing in its profile to indicate the resemblance for which 
Amundsen had named it. Storms had worn it into a shape- 
less cliff. The bay ice stretched north in a plain of mottled 
gray, and beyond lay the Ross Sea, dark and immense under 
a brooding sky. 

We trudged again up and down the basin, studying it 
from all angles, poring over maps, but with no more success 
than we had had before. A modest lump in the snow we 
tried to expand in our imaginations as the snow-banked 
remnant of Mt. Nilsen, but of Mt. Ronniken not a trace re- 
mained, unless the tiny haycock we saw was all that had 
survived its former eminence. Poor old Ronne, we thought, 
this will be a dreadful blow. Imagine having the mountain 
that is named after you reverse the order and become a mole 
hill! Even the flag pole on Amundsen’s hut had disappeared 
beneath the snow, and a sensitive magnetic instrument which 
Davies had brought along failed to show any metal under- 
neath the crust, although we tried it out in many places. 

We had already tarried there much too long, and with 


A «c 


196 LITTLE AMERICA 


twilight approaching hastened home. It became quite dark 
at an early hour, and we had no desire to stay out-of-doors 
any longer than was necessary. As it was, it was nip-and- 
tuck with frost-bite all the way back. The wind was blowing 
which made a tremendous difference. The deadly little yellow 
patches blossomed on noses and cheeks with the spontaneity 
of flowers in the spring. In the space of a few minutes, I 
warned Balchen, he warned Strom, Strom warned Davies, 
and Davies warned Crockett of danger. We came into the 
administration building on the run, and as we opened the door 
a torrent of fog, caused by the cold air striking the heated 
atmosphere of the room like steam. One could have had a 
Turkish bath as he stood. It was good to be back to the stove, 
and the tea that Tennant provided was like nectar. 

Because the sun would disappear in eight days, we decided 
to conserve daylight as much as possible. So at taps that 
night we ordered the clocks set ahead one hour. We had 
been operating on 180th Meridian Time, and by this device 
gained another hour of daylight. It was no doubt the first 
experiment with daylight saving time in the Antarctic. 

The days shortened perceptibly, in spite of artificial opposi- 
tion, and the twilights lengthened. There followed perhaps 
the most beautiful days of our visit. For as the sun rolled 
lower and lower about the horizon, becoming a dull, red orb 
that gave off little heat, the hues in the sky deepened and 
became intensified, and a rain of radiant iridescence seemed 
to drop softly upon the chill gray of the Barrier, warming 
and nourishing it into flame. It was a frigid world aflame 
with frigid colors. The cliffs surrendered none of their color 
as twilight approached, the somber sweep of Ross Sea none 
of its darkness: and the effect of night marching over the 
scene was inexpressibly strange. 

We last saw the sun on April 17th, but its beauty re- 
mained behind. Its official departure was not set until the 
to, but the following days were cloudy and we saw po 
more of it. This last time it rolled like a burning disc 
around the northern horizon, touching off in a final burst of 
radiance the scene it would quit for four months. It poised for 
a while on the western horizon, and a long, tantalizing twi- 
light began to spread gray tendrils over the Barrier. Then 


WINTER—BIRTH OF A CITY 197 


it dipped suddenly below the horizon. An eruption of green, 
blue, red and yellow diffused the entire southern horizon, and 
stayed for a time the descent of night. But night advanced 
with deepening power, and soon was in full sway of his 
empire. 

That night the zenith was aflame with the aurora australis, 
the temperature dropped to 40° below, and from the bay came 
mufiled explosions as from pistol shots, the sound of ice con- 
tracting in the intense cold. We began a new and mysterious 
life. Until August 22nd, a pale moon would be our inter- 
mittent companion. 

We fell into our new existence with little change and with 
little sense of change. We attained it imperceptibly. For 
many the gradually deepening cold and twilight slowly cut 
off all outside venture. Lights burned all day. The windows, 
indeed the roofs, were covered with snow and the twilight 
that persisted for some days after the disappearance of the 
sun gave little light. Now that work had slackened, we 
slipped into old habits and imposed them on the others. We 
evolved a routine. 

For months and months we had planned how we should 
be prepared to endure the winter. It can be a dangerous thing 
to throw a number of men into an Antarctic winter, and let 
them work out their own salvation. They may work together 
with perfect equanimity in the bright sun, when labor absorbs 
their energies and conditions allow them to withdraw to one 
side if some momentary incident happens to irritate or dis- 
compose them. A wise man and a shrewd man can mask his 
real feelings, even his character, under such conditions. And 
he is assisted in the deception by the fact that his fellows 
have neither the time nor the desire to penetrate the superficial. 
But the winter night will quickly expose all of us. 

Escape, in the wider meaning of the word, is impossible. 
Except for a quick, freezing walk the four walls limit one’s 
world; and everything that one does, or says, or even thinks, 
is of importance to one’s fellows. They are measuring you 
constantly, some openly, others secretly—there is so little else 
to do!—and with, ten, twenty, thirty and, in our case, forty- 
two personalities of varying force in a state of flux, there 
must necessarily be impacts of a kind, not necessarily physical, 


198 LITTLE AMERICA 


but rather psychological. Deception, under these conditions, 
becomes impossible. Sooner or later the inner man comes 
into the open. He is the man that is important. It is he who 
is judged. It is this inescapable process that makes the winter 
night terrible for some men. For them it can be purgatory. 

Still another insidious quality lurks in the winter night. 
The Antarctic is the last stronghold of inertness. And it is 
the almost irresistible tendency of inertness to draw all in- 
organic matter to itself. It is a phase of the whole cosmical 
process—the struggle between what is alive and what is dead, 
with life striving to extend itself into immortality, and inert- 
ness tending to pull all things unto itself. On this continent, 
whence all life has been driven, save for a few very primitive 
or microscopic forms, inertia governs a vast empire. It has 
the power to subjugate those who do not arise to resist it; and 
men who are limited and lazy, when denied free scope for 
the play of mind and body, find themselves slipping, as if 
drawn by centripetal action, into a dull, stupid, dispirited 
monotony. 

Of course it is not a clear-cut thing. It is largely a condi- 
tion of the mind. Certain men of a phlegmatic disposition 
can pass through such an experience with the facility of a 
duck shedding water: it leaves no mark. But other men find 
it real and powerful. Each day becomes a struggle for control. 
And finally each hour. 

There are no doubt many ways in which the winter night ` 
may be opposed, but we seized upon the most obvious and 
practical one. Of course it was our inevitable associate— 
work. We gave him an ally, routine. These were our 
weapons, and I dare say we made effective use of them. 

After all, it is not the Antarctic that is dangerous. It 
is the man, as nearly always, who makes it dangerous, through 
the natural expression of his vitality and his proneness to err. 
Impatience increases the destructive power of the Antarctic; 
patience draws its claws. The uncertainty here, as elsewhere, 
only here to a greater degree, comes largely from man him- 
self. Because he is impatient and self-assured, he often steps 
beyond the limits suggested by prudence, and the blow falls. 

At times it would seem that there is a malignant con- 


WINTER—BIRTH OFA CITY 199 


sciousness operating in that void, seeking man’s undoing, But 
‚ it is only that men have over-estimated their capacity. 

On the temple of Apollo at Delphi there is written: 
“Avoid excess in all things.” This we tried to impose as the 
guiding rule in everything. With that in mind, a definite 
routine was established, and it became impossible for a man 
to eat, sleep, dawdle or work too much. 

Failure to observe a routine is, I think, the cause of much 
of the unhappiness that overtakes a wintering expedition. 
Without it the days and nights lose their lines of. divisions, 
and the months prolong themselves into a monotonous, un- 
ending period. 

Our days began promptly at 8 o’clock, once winter set 
in. At that hour Dr. Gould, with an unswerving fidelity 
to his office that was the despair of all, would lift a 
tousled head from his bunk, and boom in a voice that must 
have awakened the sleeping walls: “All hands out for break- 
fast.” It was not compulsory that every one arise at that 
moment. The bitter cold that seized the first bit of exposed 
flesh (the doors had not been long shut by the night watch- 
man) was enough to cause She hardiest man to withdraw . 
hastily into the warmth of the sleeping bag again, to screw 
up courage for the final upheaval. But it behooved one to 
get up in a very few minutes, lest he give some malicious 
tormentor the opportunity of dumping him bodily from the 
sleeping bag. Except with the hardier spirits, the morning 
wash was a very casual affair. 

Breakfast was served on the dot of 8:30 o’clock, and 
here there was no compromise. The long table in the Mess 
Hall accommodated only 21 men at a time. Late arrivals, 
after the second mess, in addition to being subjected to scald- 
ing “razzing,” had to take their place at the end, and instead 
of being served, had to serve themselves. If they dared to 
ask for a glass of water, they were growled into subjection; 
and as the winter wore on, Cook Tennant and his aides 
developed the manner of a tyrant about to order the chopping 
off of a dozen heads when men made a habit of arriving late. 

Breakfast consisted as a rule of canned fruit, prunes, 
mush or oatmeal cakes, molasses, syrup, and as a great treat 


200 LIZ TLE AMERICA 


we had ham and eggs. The eggs were unlike any eggs that 
T have ever seen, The yolks froze solid and no amount of 
frying could reduce them. Like baleful yellow eyes they 
reared above the white and stared you in the face. “Flat 
eggs” became a synonym of civilization. 

When breakfast was finished, assigned duties were the 
order for the day. The specialists, such as the weather men, 
Haines and Harrison; the radio men, Hanson, Mason and 
Petersen; the physicist, Davies, had regular duties to perform. 
Czegka, the machinist, and Rucker and June, who had shown 
a remarkable aptitude for all kinds of mechanical jobs, 
generally went into the machine shop, to work on equip- 
ment. Tom Mulroy, the fuel engineer, distributed gasoline 
for the day’s activity. It was his job to see that the expendi- 
ture was kept to a minimum, and he performed the job faith- 
fully. But every one had something to do. 

Scarcely before the last dish had been removed the mess 
table, which was the most ample one in the camp, was con- 
verted into a work bench. A stranger, coming upon us 
suddenly from the trackless void outside and stepping down 
the tunnel and peering inside, would have paused in astonish- 
ment at the sight of all this activity under the snow. He 
would have seen perhaps a dozen men clustered about the 
table, and the air would be reverberating with the clash of 
hammer on steel, and the screech of saws on spruce. The 
table would have been strewn with tools, parts of sledges 
under construction, radio gear, navigation instruments, dog 
harness, trail cookers, and heaven only remembers what else. 

We were getting ready for the spring journeys and flights 
of exploration, and the manifold details involved in preparing 
for them gave all hands enough work to carry them steadily 
through each day. For while the experiences of the men who 
had preceded us in the Antarctic would largely govern pro- 
cedure, nevertheless we hoped to be able to improve on them. 
Dr. Coman, for example, in addition to his work with speci- 
mens, was working out a daily ration for the sledge parties; 
June and Czegka had taken the celebrated Nansen Cooker 
apart and were trying to make it more efficient, for all the 
fact that it is one of the most efficient trail stoves in the 
world; the radio men were building a number of small sets 


WINTER—BIRTH OF A CITY 201 


so that every sledging group might be provided with one; 
Strom and Balchen, with an artistry and craftsmanship I had 
not suspected in them, began to build several sledges; and 
Rucker, Parker and George Black assisted Captain McKinley 
in developing the thousands of feet of film taken during the 
aerial surveys. 

The photo lab, as Captain McKinley’s shack was called, 
was truly a most wonderful creation, and there was scarcely 
a man in camp who was not called, at one time or another, 
to assist our aerial surveyor at his cabalistic rites. It was at 
all times an important center of industry, and it was much 
of the time a storm center of controversy, the issue being 
whether or not it should be condemned as a public nuisance. 
Poor Mac, he got it from every side. Developing aerial film 
is difficult enough even in a modern laboratory; but in the 
Antarctic it borders on necromancy. The film is hyper- 
sensitized and comes in rolls 75 feet long and 9 inches wide. 
It must be handled in absolute darkness. And to develop a 
single reel 200 gallons of water are required. 

Now water, oddly enough, is a precious commodity in the 
Antarctic for the reason that it is produced by melting snow, 
and coal is the black diamond of the Antarctic. To bring Mac 
as near the water supply as possible, we jammed the shack 
next door to the kitchen stove in the mess hall. Chips 
Gould waved his wand and produced it out of scrap lumber. 
It was 15-feet By 15 feet, and built so low in the snow that 
the first blizzard covered it entirely. 

There were actually two rooms—the dark room, which 
was shrewdly cut off from all light, and a space which served 
as office, drying and chemical room. 

It took McKinley and his aides about two months to get 
everything in order; for everything that he does is dis- 
tinguished by meticulous care and precision; but at last he 
pronounced things ready, and plunged into the film “shot” 
over the Rockefellers, the coastline and the Bay of Whales— 
8 rolls in all. 

The 200-gallon tank was ready to receive the water, 
Tennant unhappily surrendered his stove for the morning, 
and McKinley hopefully lifted a bucket of snow on the red- 
hot lid. Half an hour’s boiling produced but one-third of a 


202 LITTLE AMERICA 


bucket of water—a very sad result. Another bucket was 
hoisted on the stove, and the first carefully placed on the floor. 
Before the second mass of snow was reduced to water, the 
first bucket promptly froze. There was, as we found, a 
difference of 50° in temperature between the air at one’s 
shoulders and the air at one’s feet, owing to the loss of heat 
in the natural circulation of the air. 

We were in a stew then. For several days every available 
man in the camp was busy making water for McKinley, and 
every source that could produce enough heat units to reduce 
snow was pressed into service. The entire camp was turned 
topsy-turvy and Tennant roared vain protests over the desecra- 
tion of his stove with unsightly pots and buckets. I dare 
say there would have been revolution had not our mechanical 
genius, Czegka, come forward with a most ingenious device. 
His apparatus consisted of two 50-gallon gasoline drums con- 
nected together, with an opening in the top for snow. Under 
each tank he rigged a large gasoline blow terch. The tanks 
were set up on pedestals so that the water could be drained 
off with ease. Thus, the water problem was “licked,” and 
McKinley returned into the good graces of the cook. 

But fate was quietly doublirig her fist for still other 
blows. Getting rid of the water was an equally difficult job. 
We could not merely let it drain off outside, as we fondly 
hoped. The water froze as it fell, and within a few hours 
a magnificent icicle had completely closed the outlet. So 
a group of valiant men, who still had the courage to face a 
snow shovel again, went out in the cold and dug a hole in the 
Barrier, 25 feet deep and about 4 feet square. The first rush 
of water hit the bottom with a crash and bore right down 
through the snow. How far it fell, where it went, no one 
could tell. We were never able to touch bottom there. But 
that problem was ended. 

There were others. Cold beset them at every turn. Each 
morning all pipes and drains had to be thawed out before work 
could be commenced. The developing film was kept warm with 
heating pads, which were specially made to fit the developing 
panien It was necessary to keep these tanks at a temperature 
of 70° at all times. Freezing of the solutions at night was pre- 
vented by draining them off in a thermos jug. Then there 


WINTER—BIRTH OF A CITY 203 


was the matter of drying the developed rolls of film, which 
must be kept intact. To this end Czegka, who was never at a 
loss for mechanical answer, contrived an 8-foot roll, the ends 
of which were buggy wheels—the first, and no doubt the last, 
parts of that honorable vehicle to find service in the Antarctic. 
The great difference in temperature that existed over a few 
feet of height was a problem here. After the reel was finished, 
McKinley discovered that it must be turned continually, else 
the film would dry on the top while it froze on the bottom. 
“I have it,” said Czegka. “Just the thing—a small motor.” It 
turned the trick for McKinley, but it played fast and loose with 
communication, and the radio men were on the verge of nervous 
prostration while it operated. 

But the joyous part came when they started developing, 
and McKinley and his colleagues plunged into the stygian 
gloom of the dark room. For a time all would be quiet and 
serene, evidence that all was going well. It would end ona 
ery of pain—a collision in the darkness. Then muffled impre- 
cations, rising steadily in grandeur and significance—McKinley 
had dropped something. Then a stamping of feet—their toes 
were getting chilly. For the difference in temperature was hard 
on the feet : it was not uncommon to see them working stripped 
to the waist, with a shoulder-high thermometer recording 70°, 
with fur pants and mukluks protecting the nether regions, and 
a layer of ice on the floor. 

No, we never lacked for excitement when the photographic 
section was in operation. 

Perhaps the most dramatic incident of the winter took 
place in the photographic laboratory. Davies was in there, 
one night, working. The small gasoline stove was burning. He 
began to feel strangely drowsy, but ascribed it more to weari- 
ness than to anything else. He noticed, suddenly, that one of 
the pups, which McKinley was accustomed to keep in the lab- 
oratory, was out, and was lying unconscious on the floor. 
Davies, who was mystified, picked up the pup and brought him 
into the mess room. Just as he crossed the threshold, he 
fainted. He had been poisoned, of course, by the fumes. 

There was a cry for Dr. Coman, who came and in his 
calm way took command of the situation. Davies was as limp 
as a rag, completely out; and while Dr. Coman worked over 


204 LITTLE AMERICA 


him on the mess table, I never saw the men so grave—for 
everyone in Little America loved Taffy. Presently, how- 
ever, Davies responded to Dr. Coman’s ministrations, opened 
his eyes weakly and asked, “What happened?” We hustled 
him out into the open and walked him up and down. The 
cold air brought him to, all right, but in our anxiety to get him 
out we overlooked the fact that we had stripped off most of 
his clothes, and he very nearly froze to death before we got him 
back. He was soon none the worse for the experience, though. 

From McKinley’s laboratory came, perhaps, the most im- 
portant geographical information of the expedition. When his 
photographs were finally developed, I saw how faultlessly the 
aerial camera had recorded all details within its range of vision. 
During the flights in the fall, McKinley photographed about 80 
miles of the coastline east of the Bay, the Rockefeller Moun- 
tains and the vicinity of the Bay of Whales. The overlapping 
series of photographs not only provided a continuous record 
of these areas, but also recorded all geographical details in 
their intricate relationship. With these photographs and the 
hasty notes taken on the flights before us, we saw how more 
superior and less fallible was the camera than the eye. Ona 
pioneering flight, the eye is so burdened with details to watch 
and study that it is, of necessity, attracted toward those things 
which are most prominent; consequently, even with the most 
studied attention, many things of importance are ignored. But 
not so with the camera. For example, when the photographs 
of the coastline were developed, a number of interesting pres- 
sure ridges, which perhaps indicated land, were discovered 
some distance northeast of the Bay of Whales. These ran in- 
land for several miles, with a central line of cleavage clearly 
shown. Best of all, Gould’s observations at the Rockefeller 
Mountains had resulted in the establishment of a number of 
control points from which, by a process of mathematics, it was 
possible to determine the relative heights and distances of the 
topographical features shown in the photographs. 

Two types of aerial surveying were done. The first of 
these is the vertical, which is taken with the lens of the camera 
pointed down through the floor of the airplane. The oblique 
15 obtained by pointing the camera at a known angle through 
an aperture in the side of the plane. Each has its distinguish- 


WINTER—BIRTH OF A CITY 205 


ing characteristic. While the vertical gives greater accuracy, 
the oblique covers a larger area and includes the horizon in 
the picture. We decided to use the oblique in the Antarctic for 
two reasons: First, all area seen on a flight must be recorded. 
Secondly, accuracy in feet is not absolutely necessary in polar 
exploration. Although most of the photographs were oblique, 
about 60 square miles of the Bay of Whales were mapped by 
the vertical at an altitude of 7,800 feet. The beauty of Mc- 
Kinley’s work lay in the fact that it was exact and faithful: 
whatever we saw, wherever we went was in black and white. 

Luncheon could scarcely be called a formal affair—merely 
a break in the day’s routine. About noon Tennant and his as- 
sistant, Arnold Clark, spread a buffet lunch on a small table 
near his stove. It was a case of helping yourself. A character- 
istic meal consisted of canned sardine and salmon sandwiches, 
and sometimes cheese. There was also tea and coffee and 
cocoa. This was the hour for general discussion, and it was 
a welcome break in work. It acquired the extraordinary name 
of “She ob”. Its derivation is curious, and yet quite character- 
istic of such designations. On the trip down on the City, 
Bill Haines used to disappear occasionally with the casual, 
but perfectly credible, explanation that he was going out 
to “take an ob.” We thought he meant ap observation. 
But it was soon discovered that instead of devoting him- 
self to meteorology, he steered straight for the galley, 
where he invariably wheedled a cup of coffee and an enormous 
sandwich from Tennant. So the phrase “to take an ob” was 
at first used derisively, in connection with any minor sophistry, 
and then was attached to this noon-day meal. 

Work was resumed about 1 o’clock and continued until 
4:30 0 clock. 

Supper was the major event of the day. On that occasion 
the table was decorated with a table cloth—an oilcloth, to be 
correct—and simply by that distinction we are entitled to be 
classed among the more luxuriously appointed Antarctic ex- 
peditions. Supper was served promptly at 5 o’clock, but long 
before that time a group of men would be found gathered in 
the mess hall, waiting to pounce on a chair as soon as Tennant 
struck the bell which signalled the serving of the feast. The 
limited space on the plain pine benches made it necessary to 


206 LITTLE AMERICA 


serve nearly four sittings, and one’s hunger was so ravenous, 
by 5 o’clock, that to sit by and wait was to suffer, especially 
when such eminent trenchermen as Strom and Crockett, who 
nearly always were first on hand, threatened to put away the 
entire meal. 

Supper, like the other meals, was wholesome; but it could 
scarcely be called epicurean, even if we did confer fancy desig- 
nations to our humble viands. There was always meat, dark 
mutton or roast beef, penguin, whale or seal meat. Meat is 
a preventative of scurvy, and for this reason it was emphasized 
in our bill of fare. There were several men who could not 
stomach these more pungent, gamier meats, and they went 
without meat most of the time. Soup was served first: it might 
be orthodox canned soup, but the time came, towards the end 
of winter, when we were beginning to economize, when no one 
dared to have it identified: better to eat and be ignorant than 
find out what the artful Tennant had used as condiments. I 
will say this, though; while some of my colleagues were of 
the opinion that either an old sail or sleeping bag had been used 
as a base for the brew, it always tasted good to me. 

After the soup, we helped ourselves from large bowls, 
which were passed around. We had a large quantity of de- 
hydrated and canned vegetables, such as potatoes, onions, 
spinach, beans, carrots and such, which Dr. Coman, with his 
eye on vitamins, selected in New York. There was always a 
dessert, perhaps custard, or pies, perhaps mince, apple or 
pumpkin. Then coffee. 

Supper was an affair that never lagged. Breakfast was 
hurried, luncheon was a rest period, but supper was a social 
affair. Here the affairs of the day and the morrow were 
vivaciously discussed: here some special accomplishment of 
brilliance or dumbness always came in for approving or sar- 
castic review; and here the affairs of a remote and almost for- 
gotten world were settled to a man’s satisfaction. 


CHAPTER X
CIVILIZATION DOES NOT MATTER


“WHATEVER merit there may be in going to the Antarctic,” 
that excellent writer, Mr. Cherry-Garrard, has said, “once 
there you must not credit yourself for being there.” To spend 
the winter at Cape Evans, Scott’s old headquarters, or at little 
America “because you explore is no more laudable than to 
spend a month at Davos because you have consumption, or to 
spend an English winter at the Berkeley hotel. It is just the 
most comfortable and the easiest thing to do under the circum- 
stances.” 1 

I will go farther and say: once your ships have started 
north and the pack has closed behind them, there is nothing 
else you can do. You are there to stay, whether you like it or 
not, for eight months at least, and all the resources of the 
world, were they brought to play, could not liberate you sooner. 
If the climate is too cold and snowy; if you have a horror of 
bathing in public; if your stomach turns at the mention of 
fried penguin; if you detest sleeping in a reindeer bag which 
sheds hair in your eyes and nose—if these things bother you, 
there is precious little you can do about it. Having made your 
bed, you must lie in it and take what crumbs of comfort there 
are. 

It is not a bed of roses, to be true. Neither is it the worst 
bed in the world. There were times when Little America 
seemed about one of the happiest and gayest spots some of us 
had ever known. 

The period that followed supper was always—or nearly 
always—a delightful time. The dishes were pushed aside, 
pipes came forth, cigarettes were lighted, and men remained 

1 Cherry-Garrard “Worst Journey in the World,” p. 178. Mr. Garrard 


was a member of the scientific staff of Scott’s last expedition, 
207 


~. 


- ) 
208% LITTLE AMERICA 


to chat or drifted off to join the groups in other buildings. 
There were some men who never seemed to rest. Ronne was 
one of these. His sewing machine in the corner of the ad- 
ministration building whirred during the day, and stopped 
only to allow his nimble fingers to fly, with a skill and sure- 
ness a woman might have envied, guiding a thread over his 
endless creations. Braathen, too, worked steadily on the 
model of the City of New York, which he started to build 
during the winter night, and on which he lavished the utmost 
care and attention. But for the rest of us this period was a 
time of relaxation, and we made most of the few hours ac- 
cording to our particular notions of what constituted leisure. 

“Tt was wonderful to observe how the characters of men 
and situations evolved. If one drew apart occasionally con- 
trasts that would have passed unnoticed stood out sharply, and 
it was surprising to observe how certain men, normally ig- 
nored, had come into their own. There was a subtle reorgani- 
zation of values. And yet, when one was immersed in it, 
there seemed to be little change, after all. What one saw 
depended: on where one stood. For in a very short time the 
fact of living in crowded quarters, under the pall of the winter 
night, became the normal existence, and what had gone before 
a rather confused and unusual memory. 

Here, as everywhere, men were clannish. Without con- 
scious stimulation or organization, a number of groups, pos- 
sessing a certain inherent solidarity, were slowly evolved. They 
created their own diversions, settled all things more or less to 
their own satisfaction, had their particular shining lights; and 
while all the men were, at one day or another, in each of these 
groups, there was nevertheless a definable kernel of organiza- 
tion that remained fairly constant. Still, there was less clan- 
nishness than one might have expected, for cliques were dis- 
couraged. And of course there was po actual separation. 
How could there be? We had the privacy of gold fish and 
elbow room of sardines. Nor was this the intention. | 
was more like groups of men in a club, separating and draw- 
ing together by the action of common interests, likes and 
dislikes. There was always a large group for, and often a 
small minority against, the policies of the camp. There 
was always a suggestion of internal politics in this minority 


3vold leon cum 3shputyv SƏHM otpe ef Chum pooka SH 10 44311 Aq 39313 le3atlA 94} 3shlpp vomoshy gpul 


‘atom AHL NI ALI) LSAITANOT yan, 


GEORGE W. TENNANT, Chief Cook. Victor H. CzecKa, Machinist. 


Examining de-hydrated food with the Medical 
Officer. 


CIVILIZATION DOES NOT MATTER 209 


never too concealed,—just enough to make it interesting. And 
thus, in a rudimentary form, and without definite intention, 
we democratized the government of Little America, which was 
often satisfactory to all, and sometimes not, which is the un- 
happy destiny of all governments. 

The outstanding institution was the gathering about Benny 
Roth’s bunk which adjoined the radio shack in the Mess 
Hall. Hege, every night, there was certain to be a crowd, and 
the congestion became so great, in fact, that it was called 
“Benny’s Huddle.” The “Huddle” was She hub of Little 
America, and if one stayed there long enough he was certain 
to know a little bit about everything that ever happened. 

One might hear Chips Gould, perhaps, discoursing on 
maritime law and the merchant marine, facts pertaining to 
which flowed from him like a stream; or Balchen talking about 
prize fights and prize fighters; or Dean Smith, drawing on a 
mind that preserves detail as if etched in steel, discussing 
snakes, which seemed to exercise a powerful fascination on 
him, or telling stories about flying which were more vivid than 
fiction, Our reserved and almost reticent assistant meteorolo- 
gist, Harrison, was often to be found there, willing to explain 
the caprices oE the weather, but eager most of all to discuss 
baseball and baseball players, in which he had an absorbing 
interest. Dr. Coman, a man of many moods, brilliant, an 
academician, yet an adventurer at heart, was sometimes there, 
and when the talk veered around to travel, would occasionally 
tell, in hard, glittering anecdote an experience he had had during 
the four years he had fought in the French Army, although 
he seldom mentioned She war itself. The “Doc” knew many 
things thoroughly, his thoughts were often on a loftier plane, 
_ and he and Russell Owen became known as the “high-brows,” 
the authorities on literature, world affairs, celebrities and 
the like. Prof. Gould stood apart in the nature of an institu- 
tion by himself. If any man was liked by all, it was he. Larry 
was a blend of coolness and warmth. His friendly ways and 
his fairness endeared him to the Winter Party at Little 
America. Larry mingled, and yet was always respected. He 
was not above the telling of an occasional anecdote, dis- 
tinguished for its dry and incisive wit. But most of all he 
was the oracle. When arguments waxed and flamed and 


210 LITTLE AMERICA 


drew to no conclusion, Larry was resorted to as the seat of 
judgment. His mind seemed to have held every fact that 
came into it. With him stood McKinley, third in command, 
the soul of tact and kindliness, with that peculiar, alert defer- 
ence which slightly deaf persons often have, adding a mark 
of sympathetic attention to his bearing. We were fortunate 
to have such men as these two. 

Arguments are at once the joy and affliction of the winter 
night. How many roared through Little America, like fire 
sweeping dry timber, I should hesitate to say. But offhand, 
well, one or two too many. Let the temperature drop to 70° 
below zero outside, we never lacked for burning issues inside. 
Was Bryan a fraud or a great and intellectually honest man? 
Is Babe Ruth a greater player than Ty Cobb ever was in his 
prime? Is the Bay of Whales really permanent, or might 
it not disintegrate some fine day and launch us all out to sea? 
Was Wilson garroted at Paris, or did he curl the rest of the 
Big Four around his little finger? Is the English Channel 
easier to swim than the Hellespont? Where can you buy the 
best steak in New York? Is the Thibetan plateau higher than 
the Polar plateau? What will you do first when (a) you 
reach New Zealand, (b) Broadway and (c) home? 

Like country cousins, argument clung to us always. They 
started innocently, gathered increasing strength and became so 
fraught with passion as to threaten to bring down the roof. 
They seemed to have no end. Pertinacious minds, reluctant 
to concede defeat, would trot them forth, like horses under 
raps, and start them off again. Then the air would clear, the 
issue be decently interred; but before its bones had ceased to 
rattle, a new one was in the travail of birth. Probably the 
wisest thing we did, when we went South, was to bring a set 
of the Encyclopedia Britannica, the World’s Almanac and 
Who’s Who. These repositories of essential information were 
a godsend. That these estimable works happen to have 
lacked some of the facts that were, for a time, like life and 
death in Little America is due less to neglect on the part of 
the editors, I imagine, than to discrimination and perhaps a 
sense of propriety. 

To get the scene one should have the background. The 
mess hall was a rectangular affair, longer than it was wide. 


= 


CIVILIZATION DOES NOT MATTER 201 


On one side was Tennant’s range and sink. Two tables ran 
the length of the room, and about the center one, the mess 
table, ran an unbacked bench. Set in the corner opposite 
Tennant’s range was the radio room, separated by a 
partition. There was no door, and the operators, Mason and 
Petersen, could be seen at work inside. The two bunks of 
Roth and Arnold were built in alongside. 

On the side opposite Tennant’s galley were arranged two 
tiers of bunks, six up and six down, like Pullman berths, 
which, instead of running lengthwise with the car, stuck out 
into the aisle. Here the comparison ceases. For these bunks 
were the plainest kind of things, simply slatted structures 
nailed to the wall and supported by beams. A man’s worldly 
possessions hung up beside him on nails, a mass of clothing, 
wrinkled and damp, a picture or two, oddly enough, a calendar 
here and there. There was barely room enough between the 
bunks for two men to pass abreast, and with clothing and gear 
choking up the corridor, the scene, to a fastidious eye, was 
one of unhealthy congestion and intimacy. 

But not at all. 

These bunks were occupied by the following men: Mason 
and Petersen, Bubier and June, de Ganahl and Smith, Czegka 
and Bursey, Chips Gould and Tennant, Strom and Black. 
During the discussions about Roth’s bunk, one would find 
perhaps half a dozen of them lolling in their own cubicles, 
those in the upper tier gazing down from an Olympian emi- 
nence and casting a phrase or two into the debate. Arnold 
Clark’s bunk was really his castle and he had taken great pains 
to make it comfortable. He had made a very fine lamp from 
a glass jar and a chimney he had found somewhere. His 
bunk was over Roth’s, and when the arguments were at their 
peak Clark might be seen curled in his sleeping bag, reading 
a book. He was a very quiet person—one of the quietest in 
She camp—but I am sure he took secret joy in listening to the 
mad discussions which raged beneath him. He was the soul 
of hospitality, and to visit his altitudinous retreat was like 
visiting the estate of a country gentleman; for Clark would 
welcome you with real old-fashioned hospitality and insist 
upon your having the most comfortable place in the bunk. 
Even when cigarettes were worth their weight in gold, Clark 


212 LITTLE AMERICA 


would always have one to offer. Bubier’s bunk had some- 
thing of the same mark of popularity. Bubier was the diplo- 
mat in the camp. It was his ambition to make things run 
smoothly at all times. He smoothed out the rough spots, and 
backed up the camp’s orders with an aggressiveness which, 
nevertheless, was so slickly applied that it almost seemed 
gentle. De Ganahl might be at work in his bunk, tapping on 
a typewriter which he had swung on a most ingenious con- 
traption, or Dean Smith writing in his diary, which is, beyond 
all doubt, the most voluminous and intimate record since 
Peppys’. 

In the Administration Building we had a group known as 
the “Rats Nest,” a most unflattering title, but ope that stuck. 
This was made up of Bill Haines, Charlie Lofgren, Henry 
Harrison and our witty Welshman, Taffy Davies. They 
shared the four bunks at one end of the building. Here, with 
Taffy and Bill as ring leaders, was concocted much of the 
deviltry that delighted and enraged the camp, and the subdued 
chuckling that was frequently overheard from that corner soon 
came to mean that some new outrage was afoot. As our 
cameramen, Rucker and Van der Veer, both genial souls, 
occupied adjoining bunks, the plotting often took queer and 
devious turns. 

Save for the arrangement of things, the appearance of 
the administration building did not differ greatly from that 
of the mess hall. My quarters, the library and the room 
turned over to the scientific staff, took up one whole end of 
the building. Bunks ran along both sides, six sets of two 
bunks on the left, and two sets of two on the right. Those 
on the left were occupied by Ronne and Dr. Coman, O’Brien 
and Balchen, McKinley and Gould, Van der Veer and Ruck- 
er, and the others by the aforesaid conspirators. On the 
opposite side, Parker and Owen, Hanson and Mulroy. Beyond 
Hanson’s and Mulroy’s bunks were Dr. Coman’s dispensary, 
a boarded partition, and the radio laboratory. 

There was the same confusion of clothes and gear, the 
same congestion. Only the spoken words were different. The 
wind howled and sobbed eerily in the ventilators, and the 


cold draught from which one could never escape was on the 
nape of the neck and the feet, 


CIVILIZATION DOES NOT MATTER 213 


But let us retrace our steps and seek out the third group in 
, this colony. We step past the scientific room, cluttered with 
intricate gear, push open a door and enter a boarded vestibule. 
On the right is the Balloon Station, whence Haines and Harri- 
son send up their inflated globes to test upper air circulation. 
There is a panel in the roof which can be moved back when 
the balloons are released and their progress through night air 
followed by a theodolite. Next to the Balloon Station is a 
door which opens on a tunnel leading to the Barrier surface; 
but we shall go instead through the tunnel to the mess hall. 

A second door opens on the main tunnel, and as our flash- 
light bores a hole through the frosty darkness, its gleams 
bring to life the most wonderful colors. Pendant ice crystals 
on the ceiling and the walls glow in and refract the light with 
the brilliance of gems. It is a crystal palace hung with jewels. 
The feet crunch noisily upon the snow, and one’s breath dis- 
charges in great clouds. This night it is chilly, 38° below zero 
in the tunnels, and on the surface it is much colder. We pass a 
series of side tunnels cut into the main tunnel. On the right are 
the tunnels leading to the medical storeroom and the main store- 
room over which Supply Officer Black presides. On the left 
are tunnels opening separately on the Gymnasium and to 
Davies’ Non-Magnetic House. Beyond these, is still another 
tunnel leading to the pit where Mulroy has stored the 
gasoline and the kerosene. As we round the bend in the 
tunnel, a beam of light creeps down our way—it is George 
Black, the supply officer, out to do some marketing. The 
light lifts suddenly, searching out a place in the wall. One 
sees Black’s face suddenly illuminated as he stares, brushes the 
rime from the wall and extracts the contents of a box. So 
we shall have beans tomorrow! 

We slide past him, with a quick word of greeting, for it is 
too chilly to linger. The tunnel opens abruptly on a vaulted 
chamber, roofed with canvas and full of boxes. It is still 
another storeroom. On the left is the coal pile, and to the 
right, under the overhang of the roof, is Tennant’s meat sup- 
ply storeroom. We traverse the space with a few steps, push 
open a door and are in the Norwegian House. Truth to tell, 
I had faithfully named it The Biltmore, as a tribute to the 
hostelry which had so generously housed the expedition at 


214 LITTLE AMERICA 


New York; but Norwegian House it remained, not because 
any Norwegians lived there—none did—but because we had 
purchased it in Norway. 

It is a cramped place about 12 feet by 16 feet. There is a 
kerosene stove under the only window, which faces south, and 
bunks take up nearly all the room that is left. There is a 
sledge on the floor, and the “Three Musketeers”, Vaughan, 
Goodale and Crockett, are working over it, experimenting with 
a new kind of lashing. Siple is curled up in his bunk, reading, 
and Thorne is studying charts. Jim Feury is in a character- 
istic Antarctic attitude—prone, dreaming no doubt of the 
snowmobile with which he got such good results. The other 
occupants, Alexander and Demas, are not about. Probably 
they are in Benny’s huddle. 

Returning, we regain the corridor and at the end open a 
door into Czegka’s machine shop, with its mass of tools and 
equipment, the Kohler humming with the peculiar rhythm of 
a well-kept engine. We push open another door into the mess 
hall. At the other end, another door, and the light searches 
out a path up a rudely cut staircase in the snow. Instantly 
the air strikes the face with the cut of a knife; it may not 
seem likely, but the difference between 30° and 50° below zero 
is real and biting. Groping up the stairs is undignified and 
acrobatic, for the risers have been worn down by constant 
use, and the passage, which is solidly filled after every blizzard, 
seems to grow narrower and more tortuous after every digging. 
We crawl and walk half-erect, and finally gain the entrance. 

A cold, gray night, a dull, grotesque moon hangs on a 
Barrier ridge, and the snow exudes a pale distilled luminosity 
which is almost a half-light. 

We make a break for it, hurrying as fast as our cumber- 
some clothes will permit. For there is a wind stirring, and 
its touch on the face is not exactly a kiss. We follow a well- 
worn path in the snow, which ends abruptly before a gaping 
hole, down which we dive, literally, and come up hard, after 
an abrupt descent, at the end of a chamber. - It is divided into 
two rather large rooms, with a partition made of snow blocks. 
The first of these is the ski repair shop, a tangle of gear, 
sledges, harnesses and skis. The next is the chopping room, 
where the seal carcasses are hacked into pieces for the dogs. 


CIVILIZATION DOES NOT MATTER 215 


A spattering of dark blotches standing out with horrid promi- 
‚ nence on the white floor tell of a recent feeding. On the right 
a hole leads into the dog tunnels, from which come throaty 
growlings. If we peer in, we may see several pairs of eyes 
burning with hypnotic incandescence, which seem to say: “Be . 
a good fellow, will you, come in and give us something to eat.” 

A strip of light is painted on a slit in the door, and ina 
moment we are face to face with an Antarctic phenomenon— 
the only two-man house in the history of Antarctic explora- 
tion. It is the shack that Walden and Braathen built out of 
odds and ends. They call it Luckheim—because, they said, 
they were lucky to get it. If we are lucky, we may find the 
tall and handsome Strom, with the body of a Greek athlete, 
the hands of a lumberjack, and the spirit of an artist, filling 
the place with the sounds of his accordion, singing haunting 
Norwegian folk songs. 

But such is not our fortune. Strom’s Muse has deserted 
him tonight, and he sits chatting with Balchen. Braathen is 
bending over the stove, the open door of which shows a fiery 
square, and tosses in a hunk of blubber. The frozen oil hisses 
and flames, and he hastily slams tight the door. The air is 
full of assailing odor of burning blubber, which offends the 
nose, causes the eyes to water and the everlasting soot quickly 
paints the cleanest face with an oily and well-nigh permanent 
scum. The stove is Braathen’s pride and joy; he made it, 
with less elegance than profanity, out of a steel gasoline drum, 
and though it smokes fearfully, I dare say Chris would not 
exchange it for the finest oil-burner ever made. The square- 
built and taciturn Walden is hunched over a half-made 
dog harness, tugging at a pipe. What queer bedfellows, 
these two men. They have nothing in common save a love of 
dogs. Walden, the son of a minister, veteran sledge-driver of 
the Alaskan Gold Rush, a man whose dogs are his life; he 
loathes the Antarctic, hates it for its sameness, its lack of hills 
and game. Braathen, a foot-loose sailor, but a graduate of 
an evangelical college, as much at home here as anywhere, 
saying little but thinking much; before he came south dogs 
were unknown to him, but down here he treats them like 
children, He has taken the cast-off dogs, the lame and the 
weak, and built them into a wonderful team. Whether it was 


216 LITTLE AMERICA 


this interest or another that has drawn them together, here is 
the most impregnable kind of friendship. It gives them a life 
apart. 

We had one other separate institution—Quin Blackburn, the 
tall, broad-shouldered surveyor from state of Washington. Be- 
hind the radio shack, he built for himself a snow house, braced 
with food boxes, and in the center of it he set up a tent. It was 
connected to the main tunnel by means of a narrow corridor— 
its only egress. “But suppose you have a fire. How will you 
get out?” we asked. Blackburn answered. “T shall depend 
upon the resources of Dr. Coman,” who was, incidentally, the 
fire marshal of the camp. So he slept in the tent during 
most of the winter, with a primus stove and sleeping bag pro- 
viding the only heat, a well-chilled disciple to the gospel of 
sleeping out-of-doors. As a consequence, he was nursing 
blisters of frost-bite on his feet and face most of the time. 

Such, in brief, were a few of the personalities and character- 
istics of Little America. 

No picture of Little America would be complete without 
mention of the dogs. Dog Town was a fascinating place. 
There the most tranquil peace and the most savage ferocity 
went hand in hand, The will of the stronger ruled it with 
iron discipline. It existed for work and chunks of frozen 
seal meat, the scent of which plunged it into ecstatic bedlam. 
Nights, when a solid stillness fell over the Barrier, the 
strangest chorus ever sung came up from the labyrinths. It 
was an uncanny experience to hear half a hundred dogs lift 
their voices in an ascending scale, reach a quavering high note, 
dwell on it a moment, then cease abruptly, as if at a signal. 
Quiet would fall, then the chant would begin anew. 

It was the wolf in them, working off some dim emotion 
in melancholy song. 

No matter how often the stakes and chains were in- 
spected, there were always a few dogs that managed to break 
away. Then there was war, fresh blood on the snow, and the 
drivers would come eee from the shacks, slashing right 
and left with the heavy butts of whips. It was bedlam while 
it lasted. 

The Eskimo dog has at times the ruthless self-will of a 
despot, and neither whip nor iron can prevail against it. I 


CIVILIZATION DOES NOT MATTER 217 


saw ope of them, who refused to be broken to harness, face 
with snarling mouth the club of one of the drivers; in the 
end it was the driver who threw down his whip and confessed 
defeat. It was not a pretty sight, even if it is the law of the 
trail. One could not help admiring the proud, indestructible 
spirit of the beast. 

These dogs can also be the friendliest and most playful 
fellows one could ask for. Asa matter of fact, their natures 
have been much maligned as far as their relationship with 
human beings is concerned. They responded wonderfully to 
kind and thoughtful handling. The drivers on the whole had 
very little trouble with them, and inevitably became very keen 
about their dogs. Most of them were as gentle with us as the 
most innocuous house pet. Braathen had a small dirty white 
Eskimo, blind in one eye, which had been discarded by the 
other drivers as useless. He named it “Moo3e-Mo33-Mou3e”, 
and by gentle, patient training turned him into one of the best 
leaders of all. 

A number of the men, however, at first had scant liking 
for them, thinking them to be treacherous. One dog, Oulie, 
who was more than half wolf, had a terrible reputation, which 
the drivers wilfully blackened for the benefit of the more 
timorous members of the camp. He was a splendid dog in 
the harness, but absolutely untamable. One night, during the 
winter, Chips Gould went down the tunnel to repair the gate 
in the maternity ward, to keep the young pups from over- 
running the camp. He carried a kerosene lantern, which he 
put down on the floor and started work. In the midst of his 
hammering, he heard a noise and turned, just in time to see 
one of the pups making off with the lantern. 

“Hey, drop that,” Gould yelled. The puppy dropped it 
and fled, but in doing so overturned the lantern, plunging the 
tunnel into darkness. At once the other dogs, aroused by the 
shout, began to howl and the tunnel reverberated with the 
racket. The carpenter’s wits quitted him; he lost his bearings, 
collided with one wall after another in a frenzied effort to 
escape from Oulie, who, he thought, was prowling about in 
the darkness, waiting to seize him. 

He became ‘hopelessly lost. 

As he stood for a moment, dazed and bewildered, a soft, 


218 LITTLE AMERICA 


moist muzzle, which he recognized, pressed against his hand. 

“Birch,” Gould whispered, his legs knocking. 

Birch was one of the pets of the camp, one of the gentlest 
dogs of all. 

The carpenter timidly ran his hand down her back, half 
expecting it would be torn from him. It was Birch, over- 
joyed to see him. “Thank God,” Gould said. He fumbled 
about in the darkness, to disconnect the chain from the stake; 
then, firmly holding on to the end of the chain, he yelled: 
“Let’s go, Birch.” And she raced, just as he had hoped she 
would, for the mess hall. Nor did Gould surrender his hold 
on the chain until the door had slammed behind him, shut- 
ting out the tumult in the tunnels. He led her over to the 
galley. “Tennant,” he said, “this dog has saved my life. I 
want to give her a whole leg of lamb.” 

The pups were the despair of the camp. There were at 
least a score of them, the sons and daughters of Lady, a small, 
nondescript Eskimo; Josephine 1, and Holly, a very beautiful 
full-blooded Eskimo. 

Literally, they ran wild. They could not be cap- 
tured, but prowled about the camp, feeding on scraps of food 
that were put out for them, enduring the lowest temperatures 
without visible discomfort. In mid-winter, when the ther- 
mometer was down to 65°, Amy, one of Goodale’s team, gave 
birth to five pups in the maternity ward. To make them as 
comfortable as possible, Goodale laid a bedding of straw on 
the floor of her crate. This was constantly damp, owing to 
the condensation of the mother’s breath, and being afraid that 
they might die, he moved them inside his shack. But the un- 
happy mother took them back, at the first chance, to the tun- 
nel. Later, he tried to wean them on such delicate foods as 
cereal and oatmeal, which they spurned in favor of frozen seal 
meat. And within a few weeks they joined the wild band in- 
habiting the tunnel, becoming the biggest and the strongest 
of the lot. For all their rapacious manners, these outlaws were 
amiable creatures; and whenever I went walking they would 
come rushing forth in answer to the call, “halloa, halloa, halloa, 
halloa,” and escort me down to the bay. 

In the presence of these creatures Igloo was as cocky and 
fierce as ever. Familiarity breeds contempt, and he had long 


CIVILIZATION DOES NOT MATTER 219 


since got over the shock they first gave him during the trip 
South on the City of New York. He feared not even the 
biggest dog among them; no doubt, he believed he was a 
great fighter because we saved his life so often. He was 
even condescending in his attitude, especially toward the 
pups, although his life was really in great danger. We 
had to watch him carefully, because when he was allowed 
to run loose he invariably made for Dog Town. Almost 
always he returned in need of medical attention, which 
Dr. Coman never failed to give him. He accompanied me 
on my walks. As Nature had not provided him with a 
heavy coat, Ronne made him one of camel’s hair, which 
covered his body and legs. This jacket was a source of un- 
diminishiny curiosity to the wild pups, and at every oppor- 
tunity during the jaunt they would steal up from behind and 
nip at it, no doubt with the intention of finding out what this 
queer bundle was. These assaults so humiliated Igloo that he 
could scarcely contain himself; he would bide his time, how- 
ever, and when one of the tormentors was off his guard, Igloo 
was op him in a flash, How he managed to escape his ami- 
able assassins for more than a year is a miracle. On at least 
two occasions a slashing stroke missed his jugular by a hair’s 
breadth. 

But I have digressed: 

There were ways other than work with which to make 
time fly. Games were popular. The ancient American insti- 
tution of poker became an Antarctic pastime. The mere fact 
that money no longer had significance did not diminish the 
action of the game. No one ever thought of playing for 
money. A far more precious currency—cigarettes—was 
played for; and toward the end of the winter, when the supply 
ran low, the faces of the players were set with a grimness as if 
the Morgan millions were at stake. Eventually, those who 
won redistributed the gains, in order to keep the game going. 

Bridge was a game favored by a few, particularly Dean 
Smith, McKinley, Harrison, Rucker, Czegka and myself. An 
old Navy game, “Acey Deucey,” was also popular. 

The Gymnasium was a very popular place. It was noth- 
ing more than a room built into the snow, perhaps 25 feet 
square and 15 feet deep, with a tarpaulin for a roof, which 


X 
220 « LITTLE AMERICA 


of course was covered with snow. Here, Balchen, Thorne, 
Dean Smith, Siple, Bursey, Strom, Black and Blackburn 
took regular work outs, even though the temperature in the 
room got as low as 50° below zero. A boxing match between 
Strom and Balchen was an almost weekly feature. 

There really was no lack of entertainment. Toward the 
end of the winter, when radio reception was good, Petersen 
and Mason picked up the broadcasting stations at Wellington, 
which we overheard via the loud speaker in the houses. 
Every Saturday afternoon, at 4 o’clock, we listened in on the 
regular programmes broadcast by KDKA, at Pittsburg, and 
WGY, at Schenectady, which were sent directly to us. Most 
of the time these broadcasts came in perfectly, but at other 
times were hopelessly confused by abnormal atmospheric con- 
ditions. It was good to hear the voices of our friends speak- 
ing, but there were moments when we stirred uneasily. The 
last place in the world to which one should send a mushy 
message is the Antarctic; whatever note it may strike in the 
heart of the intrepid explorer to which it is addressed, it 
brings only pain—severe pain—to his fellows.. 

On Sunday, which was officially a day of rest, we had a 
regular motion picture show. A curtain was lowered at one 
end of the mess hall, chairs were grouped in front, the lights 
were extinguished and Rucker and Van der Veer began the 
show. I recall these affairs with mingled emotion. The 
pictures were presented to us by the National Board of Re- 
view, which seemed to have been consistently guided in its 
selection by a reverent feeling for antiquity. However, they 
did give us Charlie Chaplin in some of his old thrillers, which 
were run over again and again, to the great delight of every 
one; and if, as it frequently happened, the most exciting part 
of the film was missing, our movie experts immediately grafted 
on a fragment of another, which often led to wonderful 
things. I would hesitate to describe the actions of the 
audience; for the emotions which a respect for law and order 
compelled them to suppress in the more pretentious motion. 
picture palaces at home, were allowed to run riot here, being 
stimulated by scandalous comments from our distinguished 
surgeon. 


Twice a week during the winter the dons and pundits of 


5 


CIVILIZATION DOES NOT MATTER 221 


Antarctic University gave lectures on the various subjects 
associated with the research purposes of the expedition. Dr. 
Gould gave the course on geology which he taught at the 
University of Michigan and which nearly every one attended. 
Mason and Hanson lectured on radio science, June conducted 
a ground school on aviation to which Balchen and Smith 
contributed, and McKinley talked on aerial surveying. These 
studies were a welcome interlude, and recommended them- 
selves on the ground that they would give the men a proper 
appreciation of the real objectives of the expedition. A num- 
ber of men gained a great deal from them. 

There was a victrola in the library in the Administration 
Building, which ground perpetually. The records were of 
jazz and classical music, and both, I think, were played to 
equally appreciative audiences. Every two or three days, 
either Chips Gould or Jack Bursey would come into the 
library and pick up their favorite records to play them over and 
over again. “The Bells of St. Mary” is a tune I am not likely 
to forget. I was working on my polar reports nearby, and 
had all the feelings of a distracted fugitive fleeing from a 
mad minstrel. 

Civilization was never too far from us to bridge the 
southern oceans and the pack. Few of us will ever forget 
the night when Vaughan, who was in the group before the 
loud-speaker, was told of the death of his brother. Some 
one, who realized what was coming, tried to turn off the 
radio; but was too late. Even the collapse of the stock 
market in the early (Antarctic) spring had its painful reper- 
cussions. Smith, who became known as the Dean of Antarctic 
financiers, watched Chrysler go down with the thermometer, 
while he unhappily directed his broker from the Bay of 
Whales. The nights when Petersen or Mason was unable to 
pick up the latest quotations were dull and gloomy ones, in- 
deed. 

The daily “Press” sent out each night by the New York 
Times was intercepted by our radio department, and “pub- 
lished” each night on the Bulletin Board. Thus, we kept more 
or less abreast of the world’s affairs, and new fuel for dis- 
cussion was rarely lacking. 

When other entertainments lagged, the amateur talent 


222 LITTLE AMERICA 


produced its own. We had our “Antarctic Follies,” which 
made up in brawn what it lacked in pulchritude. Crockett, 
Goodale, Feury and Bubier were the chorus, and they made 
a dashing appearance in skirts made from dish towels and 
wigs made from rope, although a generous showing of none 
too clean woolen underwear was hardly calculated to appeal 
to an aesthete. The humor was, I fancy, rather practical, 
often broad and not infrequently Rabelasian. While it de- 
lighted us beyond measure, I doubt whether it would seem 
particularly amusing to any one else. Too often the humor 
turned on some peculiarity, some phrase or incident that be- 
longed only to us. The practical jokes, which are enjoyed 
only by the perpetrators, were always with us. Not long 
after we took up the routine winter existence, a crevasse, 
which widened alarmingly, was discovered in the surface to 
the north not far from the houses. Presently a second crack 
appeared to the east, and then a third to the west. We were 
literally surrounded by cracks, and the men who still held 
to the theory of the impermanence of the Barrier, viewed 
them with misgivings. An ignoble conspiracy was hatched 
and executed. Very early one morning, at 4 a.m. to be 
exact, when the temperature was about 40° below, Demas 
aroused the administration building with a cry, into which 
he put the whole force of his lungs,—‘‘The Barrier has 
broken.” Men who were always the last out of their bunks 
in the morning were first out this time. Some paused, 
shrewdly, to snatch adequate clothing, but others paused for 
nothing. Hanson, ever resourceful, grabbed a handful of 
tools and radio equipment with the intention of making an 
emergency radio set to inform the world of our peril. The 
vestibule was clogged with hurrying figures. But outside 
nothing was changed, the Barrier was still intact and the 
shivering, half-clad men filed back again, vowing deadly 
things. Poor Demas confessed later that he did not close 
his eyes for three nights, lest his tormentors rend him limb 
from limb. 

The night that Owen stood the watch was a gala 
occasion. When the fire in the galley went out, several con- 
spirators from the Norwegian House stole out and tied a 
coal sack around the chimney flue. They were up early the 


CIVILIZATION DOES NOT MATTER 223 


next morning, hidden in the tunnel, when Russell came in, 
‚ none too enthusiastically, to make the fire. It was bitter 
cold. Shivering and miserable, he chopped the kindling, 
packed it in the stove and applied a match. It blazed merrily 
for a few moments, then a torrent of smoke poured forth. 
It gathered in volume, spread across the ceiling, then 
whirled downward in a choking pall. The occupants in 
the upper bunks awakened first, sputtering, then those in 
the lower tier. Imprecations and unkindly advice were hurled 
at the watchman, who was frantically manipulating every 
gadget on the stove in a vain effort to promote a draft. 
Several sufferers, of a sterner mould, crept from their sleep- 
ing bags to help him. Meanwhile the residents of the Nor- 
wegian House were pressed against the door, enjoying the 
sounds with unholy glee. 

Just at the moment when those inside were preparing to 
abandon the house, until the smoke cleared, a spark found 
its way through the bag, set it afire and created a draft. The 
incident closed on the note of threatened reprisals. 

If any particular quality of the conversation stands out 
in memory, it is the power of ridicule. Ridicule is a crush- 
ing force anywhere; in a crowded existence, such as a polar 
shack, it carries a sting that penetrates and destroys. There 
were several tongues that turned most neatly the sarcastic 
phrase called “the wise-crack,’’ and innocent phrases were 
twisted and distorted out of original meaning. It was de 
Ganahl’s unfortunate habit, when he crawled down from his 
bunk, to bring his big boots down on Dean Smith’s head. 
Joe, who is the soul of politeness, always said: “I’m sorry.” 
In a short time, it was a courageous soul who dared to say, 
“Pm sorry.” The phrase “shipmates” was tortured out of 
existence. Compliments were almost never spoken. Hanson, 
a very considerate man, used to speak enthusiastically of the 
work oi his aides until a nihilist labelled it “apple-rubbing”’ 
and “‘flag-flying.” After that, few dared to risk exposure to 
the phrase. 

Perhaps I have dwelt overlong on this side of the picture, 
in an attempt to show what men do and think in the winter 
night. Really, this is but a small fragment of the whole— 


| 


-- 


224 LITTLE AMERICA 


“... full of sound and fury, 
And signifying nothing.” 


The day ended promptly at to o'clock, and here strictest 
routine prevailed. On the dot, the main lights in the house 
were extinguished, the fires were allowed to die out and the door 
was opened. The poor physical conditions that lowered the vi- 
tality of several wintering parties in the Antarctic was partly 
due to the fact, we believed, that the majority of the men re- 
mained cooped up in their shacks, breathing stale and unrenewed 
air, while the fires roared all winter long, day and night. The 
men who wished to do so, could read in their bunks. There was 
a regular semi-monthly allotment of candles, and the more 
thrifty men saved the tallow as it dripped and put it into 
‚ glass jars which they converted into lamps by inserting wicks; 
e made kerosene lamps from pickle jars, food tins and 
similar containers. But after the door was opened, and as 
the heat from the fire diminished, these flickering lights went 
out, one by one, first in the lower bunks, where the cold 
draught quickly settled, then in the upper bunks, as it mounted. 
In a very short time, the temperature fell to 35° below zero, 
during the more bitter spells, and the snug warmth of the 
sleeping bag was not resisted for long. 

Soon only the night watchman remained awake. 

Being night watchman was one of the routine jobs of 
the camp. It was a lonely and sometimes a cold job. At 
first, Dr. Gould assigned the job to any man who happened 
not to have a day duty, but later the assignment was made 
alphabetically, and every one, with the exception of the cook 
and his assistant, stood the watch. 

The watchman had certain privileges, however. His post 
was in the library. He was allowed a candle and a kerosene 
lantern. More often than not, he induced the cook to provide 
him with hot coffee in a thermos jug, and sandwiches, to 
fortify himself against the rigor of the vigil. The duties 
were varied and interesting. Every half hour he was required 
to step outside and observe the auroral display? and record 


* Although the aurora was first observed March 16-17, a regular watch 
was not established until April 3, 


Owing to the necessity of using every 
man to put the camp in order. 


The watch continued uninterruptedly until 


Tee 


CIVILIZATION DOES NOT MATTER 225 


his report in a book that Davies had provided for that purpose. 

‚ This watch, however, was later taken over by Demas, who 
stood it most of the winter, because he believed he could make 
use of the quiet to pursue his studies. Demas is one of the 
most studious young men I have ever known, The watchman 
also had to check up, at frequent intervals, the direction and 
velocity of the wind, which was accomplished by means of 
an ingenious, electrical recording device that Haines had 
rigged in the scientific room. At least once before 2 o’clock 
A.M. and once afterwards, he was obliged to make the 
rounds between the main houses, both via the tunnels and 
overland, if storm did not preclude the latter trip. This was 
a precaution against fire. At 6:30 o'clock in the morning, 
he kindled the fires in the galley and the stove in the admin- 
istration building, called the cook, filled the bucket on the 
library stove with snow, so that the others might have warm 
water with which to wash, and so to bed. 

The duty was not especially complicated, and the watch 
was popular with some men for the reason that it allowed 
them the solitude for reading and study. The walk overland 
between the houses was, for those who had the desire to find 
it so, a rich and stirring experience. On clear, calm nights, a 
silver moon was often visible, stars glittered with abnormal 
brilliance, and the trackless expanse of the Barrier was dom- 
inated by a silence so deep and profound that it seemed to be 
physical. At such a moment no place on earth could be more 
quiet. Then, from afar off, would come perhaps the distant 
rumble of the Barrier breaking, or from nearby the terrifying 
reports of contracting ice, like a burst of rifle fire. Once 
or twice I heard a snow quake—an extensive rumbling and 
shaking under foot as the crust of vast snow fields to the 
south settled to a more solid level. Then the silence would 
restore the equipoise. 

Inside the huts, a silence of a different nature: the lulling 
whirr of the revolving cups of the anemometer overhead, 
not unlike the sound of an idling propeller slightly off center, 


October, when the sun began to shine all 24 hours. The aurora was last 
seen September 26, 1929. A total number of 7,412 half hourly observations 
were made over this period. The method of classification used was that 
of Dr. H. U. Sverdrup. 


226 LITTLE AMERICA 


and, when it was very cold, the thrumming of the taut wires 
supporting the anemometer pole, the fainter sound of men 
breathing, and sometimes an indiscreet phrase mumbled by a 
sleeper. 

Despite the cold, there were some men who went out of 
doors every day, for exercise and fresh air. Save during the 
worst kind of weather, I made this my practice, and there 
were many others who did the same. Sometimes we walked 
in groups, but more often went alone, not because we did not 
want company, but because we wanted privacy more. A few 
minutes of reflective contemplation under the broad arch of 
sky were always good. We followed, as a rule, the trail to the 
westward, down Ver-sur-Mer Inlet to the Bay. 

There was always something new to be found there. 
Pressure ridges changed their shape constantly. New ones 
appeared, rising, in some cases, to heights of 30 and 40 feet, 
taking on eerie forms in the half-light. Far off when the moon 
was out, the cliffs of the western Barrier were visible, their 
white walls merging dimly into the gray overtones of the 
night. In certain places voices carried marvellously. One 
could hear men talking as if they were nearby, although one 
or two miles away. The swish of skis on the snow carried 
on the crisp air very clearly. 

Dr. Gould and Davies made studies of ice formations, 
particularly of the crevasses in the neighborhood. The ice 
pits to the north of the camp were fascinating, although they 
scarcely approached in magnitude the chaotic disturbances to 
the southwest, where the Barrier met the bay ice. I was 
determined to investigate these, and during the winter 
descended one of them. It was done on a very cold day. 
The temperature registered 50° below, and on the way to 
the crevasses Strom froze his toe so severely he had to run 
back to the camp, to thaw it. However, he returned quickly. 
Because the cold stopped the chemical action of dry batteries, 
we could. not use flashlights. Hanson had rigged up a search- 
light to a portable gasoline generator, which we trundled to 
the scene of operations. In the party were Strom, Siple, 
Vaughan, Feury, Dr. Coman and Thorne. 

We came to a halt at the brink of one of the largest 
chasms. It was perhaps three feet across. The searchlight 


CIVILIZATION DOES NOT MATTER 227 


was pointed down, but it failed to show the bottom as the 
‚ cgeya33e did not fall straight, but bent in at a sharp angle. 
Strom made a series of lines fast about my chest and, with 
the others holding, started to descend. Just as I reached the 
first curve in the wall, the line across my chest began to 
choke me. I yelled at the top of my lungs, but the sound 
from the gasoline engine was so loud that they did not hear 
me. With my legs spinning wildly over space and unable to 
gain a foothold on the smooth walls, I thought, for a moment, 
I might choke to death. But a few vigorous tugs on the line 
brought quick response from above. I was hauled out, and 
on the surface rearranged the lines, then went down again. 

The beauty of that descent I could not hope to describe. 
The beam from the searchlight fell on immense ice crystals, 
some of which were from 5 to 8 inches long, which festooned 
the walls, and burned like myriads of gems. The walls them- 
selves, when I glanced back, had in the light of the searchlight 
turned into emerald green and blue and purple and seemed 
transparent. 

Preceded by a shower of crystals, I descended slowly. 
About 15 feet down, the crevasse turned sharply, and I care- 
fully picked my way from projection to projection. About 
40 feet down, I touched bottom, and found myself standing 
in a grotto, with the domed walls curving in above me, and 
the refracted illumination from the searchlight falling through 
the slit rose in a glorious rainbow. Hege and there a few 
thin columns of vapor rose trembling from the floor. To 
the right and left the walls closed in narrowly, so that I was 
unable to go more than a few feet in either direction. The 
thermometer which I carried registered only 15° below zero. 

In response to my signal, Strom lowered a crowbar, and 
I attacked the ice underfoot, to determine whether the ice on 
which I stood was solid or merely a bridge. In spite of 
diligent prodding, I penetrated no more than a foot, where 
I came to solid ice. I tasted a bit of the slush, and it was 
unmistakably salty. The sea water, then, filled the crevasses 
in the vicinity of Little America from sea level down. Of 
course, it is probably frozen all year round. What fascinated 
me most were the ice crystals, which littered the floor of the 
crevasse. They were extraordinarily large and perfect in 


228 LITTLE AMERICA 


structure. These Antarctic flowers are formed by the vapor 
from the warmer sea water rising, condensing and freezing, 
the successive droplets forming long, pendant crystals. 

There is one point I should like to make clear. The 
notion that the winter night is pitch dark is an exaggeration. 
A completely dark night is the exception rather than the rule. 
On what was presumably the darkest night of all, June 21st, 
when the sun is at its greatest distance below the horizon, a 
narrow ribbon of pale red illuminated the northern horizon 
at noon. Often, after a stiff blow from the south, the dark- 
ness of a water sky, which indicated the Ross Sea was open, 
stood out sharply against the lighter hues of the night. 
Throughout July, save when the sky was overcast, a widen- 
ing arch of light in the northern sky heralded the slow-re- 
turning day. The winter night is, as a rule, a dark somber 
gray rather than total darkness. And, besides, one does 
become accustomed to partial darkness. 

The Aurora Australis, the Antarctic equivalent of the 
Aurora Borealis, which rarely failed to appeag,! imparted 
a lovely illumination to the night. Most of these displays 
were seen shortly after midnight, although there was generally 
a second period of subsidiary maximum between 6 and 7 
o’clock at night. They were but rarely seen at noon. By far 
the greatest number appeared in the east, and the fewest in 
the direction of the south magnetic Pole. The appearance of 
the aurora in the west came generally in the nature of an ad- 
vance guard to the more brilliant display in the east. 

The aurora is perhaps the most beautiful gift of the 
heavens. Its form changes constantly, and its coloring and 
intensity vary with a rapidity that baffles the eye. The fainter 
displays were usually white, with a greenish or yellow-white 
overtone, but with increasing intensity other colors—pink, red, 
violet, green and yellow—made their appearance. On May 
4th, we saw a gorgeous display, in which every form of the 
aurora made its appearance—glows, curtains, arches, coronas, 
streamers. Shortly after 7 o’clock, a series of undulating 
curtains stretched across the sky, almost overhead, from 


Ya : 
Mr. Davies reports that the proportion of clear or only partly cloudy 


nights on which the aurora was observed between April 3 and Sept. 26 is 
more than 90 percent. 


MARTIN Ronne, Tailor. 


THE RADIO DEPARTMENT: 


T oft tra rinht — Howard Mason. TLoya Berkner. Malcolm Hanson 


Tue MAIN Snow TUNNEL CONNECTING THE ADMINISTRATION BUILDING AND 
THE Mess HALL. 


Food boxes line the upper walls, and the entrances to several of the storerooms can be 
seen. Most of the rooms were hewn in the snow. 


CIVILIZATION DOES NOT MATTER 229 


east to west, with a band of pink and purple running 
‚ along the edges, and rose and straw-yellow softly suffusing 
the interior. For a few moments these curtains rippled and 
shimmered, as if shaken by some Olympian hand. Then they 
parted, and a mass of colors, deep and intense, whirling and 
turbulent, came in, like actors taking the stage, and filled the 
Heavens with color. Once I had the unusual experience of 
seeing an aurora, a sunset glow and the moon at the same time. 
It occurred on May to. I had stepped out for a breath of 
fresh air. Far to the north the distant sun, shining on distant 
parts of the world, painted a thin line of yellow on the horizon. 
Due east, the moon, red and glowing, strove to push clear 
of fragments of cloud wrack that obscured its face; and from 
the north to the south the aurora weaved in pale and lovely 
curtains. 

But the Antarctic night can be as black as the darkest pit, 
when the sky is overcast or stormy. On such occasions the 
daily walk had a spice of adventure. The beacon on the north- 
eastern radio tower was always turned on when conditions 
were bad, but even its friendly and reassuring wink was ob- 
scured by light falling snow. On June 25th, during the 
severest blizzard we had theretofore experienced, Harrison 
insisted upon taking the overland trail between the houses. 
In the dense drift he lost his way, and if the wind had not 
shifted slightly, so that he caught sight of the beacon, in the 
brief time it was exposed, it might well have been the end of 
him. Our cook was nearly lost in the same way. Toward 
the end of the winter, we honored Tennant with a holiday, to 
give him an opportunity to study the Antarctic from a 
different position than the galley. He celebrated it promptly 
by getting lost between the main houses; and after vain feints 
through the murk stumbled at last upon the mess house. 
He was so chagrined that he would not venture out there- 
after except when the sky was clear, for which we were 
properly grateful. 

It was easy to become lost, even within a radius of fifty 
feet of the camp. After a blizzard, everything about Little 
America, save the radio towers, was buried in snow. The 
houses and the airplane hangars were obliterated, and it took 
a practiced eye to distinguish the identities of the shapeless 


230 LITTLE AMERICA 


mounds that showed above the surface. In a storm, even 
these few landmarks disappeared; and the walker thus over- 
taken had to rely upon a sense of direction and a glimpse of 
the beacon to guide him home. 

However boring may be the subject of weather in civiliza- 
tion, it is ever a lively topic in the Antarctic. It is a vital 
subject to the scientists, in the first place. And its vagaries 
and excesses were interesting to all. 

May began with a warm spell. On the 2nd the ther- 
mometer registered as high as 13 degrees above zero. But 
on the 4th it plunged to 42° below. On the 26th, a wind 
from the south-southeast drove it up to 5° above after an 
uninterrupted spell of sub-zero weather, but the wind shifted 
again to the east and before the day ended, the thermometer 
read 38° below zero. The monthly average was 22.6" below. 

June was rather a temperate month, with a mean tem- 
perature of 10.7° below. On one day, the gth, it was actually 
warm, the thermometer registering as high as 15° above zero. 
This month was marked by two extraordinary phenomena. 
On the 11th and on the 19th what was undeniably a misty rain 
fell, which, as it clung to windward side of the radio towers 
and other exposed surfaces, formed a rime which built up into 
a beautiful fringe of ice crystals. From one end to the other 
the camp was festooned with these ice flowers, some of which 
were three to four inches in length, and the scene was in- 
describably beautiful. There were a number of occasions 
on which fog formed at temperatures as low as 40° below 
zero, in quantities thick enough to obscure objects less than 
1,000 feet away. That water vapor can exist in a sub-cooled 
state in nature at such low temperatures was a great surprise 
to many of us, and science has not yet evolved a satisfactory 
theory for its presence. 

Next to March, June was the snowiest month of our stay. 
The snowfall for the month was 16.2 inches. 

July came in frostily, with a temperature of 60° below 
the first day. It went out with a roar. The wind reached 
a velocity of 75 miles per hour for one minute on the DOSh; 
and op the 31st was still blowing hard. For 27 days the 
temperature fluctuated between 2° above and 69° below. On, 


* This was the highest wind velocity recorded at Little America. 


CIVILIZATION DOES NOT MATTER 231 


the 28th, it plunged to 72° below zero. ! On the 31st, it recorded 
II above. The monthly average was 44.7° below. Five 
blizzards, three of great severity, distinguished July. Yet, 
from the point of view of clearness, it was the best month of 
all. There were 17 clear days. 

August came in warm, with a temperature of 15° above, 
but it went out in a chill, the temperature for the 31st being 
66° below. During a severe storm on the 16th, the barometer 
dropped to the lowest point ever recorded in the Antarctic, 
27.82 inches. 2 Yet much worse storms were heralded with 
a less drastic fall. Over and over again, it was shown that 
the barometer was wholly unreliable in foreshadowing 
weather conditions in the Antarctic. On the 22nd, the winter 
was Officially closed when the sun returned. 

How cold was it, really, at Little America? 

Well, let us look at Haines’ charts. During 114 days the 
temperature reached 40° below zero; on 62 days, 50° below; 
on 33 days, 60° below, and on three days, 70° below. Yet 
it was subject to violent changes. During a blizzard on the 
5th and 6th of June, the temperature rose from 49° below to 
16° above in the space of 20 hours—a change of 65 degrees. 
A rise in temperature of from 30° to 40° within a few hours 
was not uncommon during a blizzard; in fact, was a character- 
istic resultant. So we came to welcome a blizzard as a mixed 
blessing: it was a nuisance by itself, but it generally lifted 
the siege of a protracted cold spell. However, when the 
wind shifted to the south, as it often did after a blizzard, 
the temperature retaliated by falling quite as rapidly as it 
rose. So we never had reason to complain of the heat. 

These excessive temperatures had singular effects. One 
of the most fascinating manifestations to men who had never 
heard of the phenomenon was the freezing of the breath. 
When the temperature went under bo" below one’s breath 
froze as it exhaled, with a sound like a wind rustling over 
snow. It is an uncanny thing, and the day when it first was 
observed, the incredulous members of the expedition insisted 


1This was the lowest temperature of the year, comparing with Amund- 
sen’s lowest of 74.4° below zero. 
2 27.85 inches reduced to sea level. 


232 LITTLE AMERICA 


on going outside to test their own breaths, before they would 
accept the fact. 

When the temperature fell below 55°, kerosene lanterns 
used in the tunnel would go out, though not a breath of air 
was stirring. The fuel, of course, had frozen. The rubber 
insulation on the telephone wires became brittle and broke 
when handled. Rucker and Van der Veer had a horrible time 
with their motion picture cameras. In severe cold, the moving 
parts would bind, owing to unequal contraction. Under 264 
below, the film began to break, and She men had to rethread 
them with bare hands, while their frozen fingers stuck pain- 
fully to metal parts. After such an operation, I have seen 
them dancing about in the snow, hugging their hands under 
their armpits, like men possessed. The slightest bit of mois- 
ture in the cameras froze the moment it was exposed. The 
instruments were usually left outside, for on coming in con- — 
tact with the warm air of the houses they immediately were 
covered with frost. In cases where cameras were brought in, 
before they could be used again, it was necessary to take them 
apart, wipe them thoroughly and bake them for several hours 
near the stove. If Rucker or Van der Veer breathed on the 
lenses, however slightly, the vapor froze in irremovable frost 
and went out of action. Yet these two men accepted this 
inconvenience as part of the job: I have seen few men so 
absorbed in their work as Van der Veer was absorbed in his 
photography. 

The light, drifting snow was no less a nuisance. It sifted 
into everything, through the narrowest of openings; and 
whether the ultimate place of lodgment was the surface of a 
lens or the back of one’s neck, it invariably found a way 
through. Unless one took great precautions, a walk in these 
lowest temperatures was likely to bring real suffering. 

When winter came, we were well-clothed to meet it, 
thanks to the labors of Ronne, who worked so hard making 
and repairing clothes for the rest of us that he had no time 
to attend to his own. 

The fundamental unit of cold weather clothing is the 
parka, which is She Eskimo’s overcoat. It is a development 
of ages of combat with the cold and is the most nearly 
perfect thing of its kind. Mine was made of reindeer skin, 


u3d) |echapt, 3oc ‘SF 
oda) Jouuny 3od ‘of 
E “Sz cvoya ery] “vz 
Buiddoyg “LI cocovo [veg “OI 

5414 Bum piog (p) ‘resuey puchopeya (o) 


`{achutpy, TyeVues ap) pechu, coCh re 

‘(puun chapye M) Tacup, 3oa ‘65 
“IopUuly popoolu ope `2 

*(eeppa3u y uosue H) epue3uy "ST 


>3 


mala Y oaa E 
*(Iquuny Joiqng) jouuny prng ‘82 
‘doys 3ushchovuy ce 


(0013=35 chogetl y wleyuessny) Foch3yatom pue vte3che H chocetAy ‘21 


puv esnoy emm (p) ‘100191035 (o) 


`(avpo+ 014) 
esnoy 4199p8 ye3apacy 


*(e3poH 212127) 
asnoH 91049 yeogpayy 
+(a3po}{ wasiejeg) e3poH OPLA 
"(aspon 3teatov) e3poH 480101 


*(asnoyy ATION) 
eepoH ydergozoyd 


95 


N 
\ 
o EC N 


911 


*Joor 31¥ (a) ‘dogs redor 


frays Jajashoshlaciy, (q) :013935 pooced 3opa (e) 
(5014835 194489 M aolocy et) pot}®+5 [89180]01093e{ ‘tt 


*gsnoy e3uto3ay (9) 


got "ovpoc ocep3esh-pom (e) 
(potyedveypyvut rue gy) poceyv 54298 95 
"b ‘(osnog 3oo) e3pon chapye M puv usyyersg ma 
78 -(otoshyuya ey) o3pop petdomlom "E 
sd, (osnog 33elteya 1e8pya) 
3atpuva pocec3pushpy (e 
*9 *(esnoyy 3321129 posso) Pec SSN `1 


`e 
"ecovo 1800 ‘12 
"gvupopuy (4) *3l3amoy, (e) : (50139835 
t te3uech ourga 1030012} piod (q) :904$3 10 M (e) 


"Pesha, cgucom) Jeuuny, ocau3eyy g `'(tapup], ch9218101) ochu, shey 97 
+50100191046 “og "ecovo epco3vo “OL ‘prem Aushleey `81 ‘asnoH 
otpe $420) poshcheyv otpem “VI *(cutl3vuu Ag) YOIpsog) WntseuwAg ‘EI 


ozi og ot 
3994 u) 9655 


VIILIUVLNV 


YOGChChYMYM 311111 


"ak 


4 


to Y 


p 


- P 
4 


CIVILIZATION DOES NOT MATTER 233 


with wolverine rimming the hood. It weighed about six 
pounds; yet even during walks when the thermometer 
registered as low as 60° below zero, it offered adequate 
warmth. It is my opinion that a reindeer skin parka, if prop- 
erly made and worn, offers double the warmth of the wool 
parka at half the weight. During the coldest weather, I 
rarely wore more than twelve pounds of clothing. The cut 
of my parka I borrowed from the Eskimos at Etah, on the 
theory that, having lived for centuries in the polar regions, 
they surely must have developed an efficient cold weather gar- 
ment. During my daily walks I often tested out new kinds 
of clothing. 

The parka fitted the body snugly, especially about the 
hips, with a flap that went under the crotch and buttoned in 
front. It carried a hood, the edges of which projected be- 
yond the face, so as to shield it from the wind. The armpits 
were made very large, so that the arms could be drawn inside 
for additional warmth. In a dead calm one can endure very 
low temperatures with slight discomfort. In fact, a walk 
at 50° below in still air is rather an exhilarating experience. 
It is the wind that is cruel. The faintest wind, moving super- 
cooled air against the face, tortures the traveller to distraction. 
If the wind is not too strong, the projecting rim of the hood 
forms a cushion of air warmed by the face and offers some 
protection. But otherwise if the wind is dead ahead, it is 
better to turn the head sideways. Often, during walks in bit- 
ter cold, I came across my colleagues beating their way back to 
Little America stern first, rather than expose their faces to the 
knife-like edge of the wind. How great a difference the 
wind causes was proved by a series of experiments made by 
Dr. Coman and Mr. Davies on the cooling power of the air 
under different weather conditions. On July 28th, when the 
temperature was 70° below and the velocity of the wind about 
215 miles per hour, the skin lost 52 millicalories per square 
centimeter per second. On August 16th, when the tempera- 
ture was 5.5° above, and therefore actually 75° warmer, the 
skin lost 95 millicalories per square centimeter per second. 
The difference lay in the wind which was then blowing at a 
velocity of 30 miles per hour. 

During a walk, with the temperature in excess of 60° be- 


234 LITTLE AMERICA 


low, my eyelashes froze quite tight. It was so difficult trying 
to keep them open that I decided to make a face mask. The 
final product, which was made by June, resembled a baseball 
mask. It consisted of a wire structure which was covered 
with wind-proof material. A funnel-like arrangement led to 
the mouth. The air was drawn in through the nostrils, and 
it was expelled in turn through the mouth. As the exhalations 
condensed and collected in the funnel in the form of rime, it 
was brushed off with the hand. It was an inconvenient device, 
but it offered great protection. Rucker invented another type, 
which fitted over the eyes like goggles and had a wool curtain 
which draped over the jaw. This curtain was tucked around 
the neck of the parka, and could be fitted in whatever shape was 
desired. For example, if the wind was striking the left side 
of the face, a breathing hole could be made on the other side, 
and the mask immediately froze in whatever shape it was 
put. 

I suppose we turned out a thousand different kinds of 
things to beat the cold, some of which were successful, some 
of which were not. The basis of most of them was reindeer 
skin, which I believe to be the lightest and the warmest fur 
that can be had. It is much warmer per unit of weight, than 
seal skin and, therefore, much more efficient. We had brought 
the skins of fifty young reindeer to the Antarctic, and these 
Ronne turned into sleeping bags, parkas, and pants, for the 
men who could not be properly equipped from the ready- 
made supplies brought from the United States. The pants 
were generally made of the softer portion of the hide and 
were not as thick as the parka, because the limbs are less 
susceptible to cold. 

The feet are the most vulnerable point to frost, especially 
on the trail. Moisture forms as a result of the cold air com- 
ing in contact with the heat of the body and collects as rime, 
and frost bite, if precautions are not taken, is the result. The 
warmest boot that I know of is the finnesko. It is entirely 
covered with fur. Several layers of felt are padded on the 
bottom, and over them is laid a matting of saennegrass. This 
grass absorbs the perspiration, and so helps to keep the feet 
dry. When the shoe is removed, the saennegrass can be 
lifted out, the rime brushed off and the boot itself kept free 


CIVILIZATION DOES NOT MATTER 235 


of moisture. It may seem odd, but moisture is the curse 
_ of Antarctic travellers; it is an enemy no less malicious than 
wind. 

The hours we spent in planning our cold weather clothes, 
both before we left New York and during our stay in the 
Antarctic, perhaps exceeded the time we devoted to any other 
single thing. We steeped ourselves in the lore evolved by 
such experienced polar travellers as Scott, Shackleton, Maw- 
son, Amundsen and the others. When experience justified it, 
we added some new development of our own. Always, as 
we experimented with different kinds of clothing during the 
winter, we had in mind the proper equipment of the trail 
parties which we should leave in the spring and the airplane 
personnel who might have a forced landing far from base. 
Once the journeys began, proper clothing would be no less im- 
portant than food. 

Let us consider the boot. A simple thing: enough leather 
to encase the foot and protect it, thongs to bind it tight— 
what more is necessary? Much, much more. Some of the 
finest brains enlisted in geographical research have struggled 
futilely with the problem of what constitutes the most efficient 
. boot for polar travelling. Failure in this respect can bring 
_dire suffering. For every man who freezes his hands in the 
polar regions, there are 25 who freeze their feet. If Achilles 
was vulnerable in one heel, polar explorers are particularly so 
in both heels. 

With ski boots, for example, the problem lies in inducing 
shoemakers to make them large enough to accommodate 
extra protection. Whether it is because they object to 
excessively large boots from the point of view of art, or 
simply think that you are wrong, I do not know. The fact 
is, in bitter cold weather adequate warmth can be secured 
only by the use of three or four pairs of stockings, plus a 
liberal quantity of felt and saennegrass on the bottom of the 
boot. If the throat of the boot is not large enough to admit 
the enlarged member, the traveller is out of luck. To guard 
against this contingency, I borrowed from Amundsen She 
largest boot used on his expedition, and had the boots that 
were made for us modelled on the same heroic mould. They 
were about size No. 14. How large they were may be judged 


236 LITTLE AMERICA 


from the fact that when I had my boots cut down for summer 
use, they were still large, even though diminished by three 
sizes. 

No one on this expedition had reason to criticize the boots 
as not being large enough. The boots were ample enough 
for temperatures of 70° below zero. They were, of course, 
much too large for summer wear, and especially for use on 
a long sledging journey. It was, therefore, necessary to 
redesign later and make them smaller. Thorne, for example, 
designed and made an entirely new type of ski boot with 
material which he had brought to the Antarctic. Balchen and 
Strom also proved very skillful in cutting down the stock boots 
for summer use. These boots were made with a flexible leather 
top, with a leather sole half an inch thick, and were especially 
strengthened in the heel, where most of the wear comes in 
skiing. The beauty of these boots lay in a shrewd arrange- 
ment by means of which the size could be altered without 
the impairment of snugness. A pucker thong secured at the 
heel ran about the ankle, and this could be loosened or 
tightened, according to the number of stockings one decided 
to wear. We learned many new things during the winter. 
When subjected to excessive use, the uppers of these boots, 
which were fastened to the soles as with ordinary boots, had 
the tendency to pull loose, and were very difficult to repair. 
On Thorne’s suggestion, we carried the fabric of the uppers 
outward instead of inward where they were seamed to the 
sole, and as a result were not troubled by the fault again. 

Complementary to this supply of clothing we had wind- 
proof shirts, parkas, pants, mittens, socks and sleeve pgo- 
tectors. ‘These were made of a fabric similar to that used 
in making airplane fuselages, which is so closely woven that 
the wind does not readily penetrate it. The windproof pants 
and parkas were worn over fur clothes, and were splendid 
for keeping drifting snow from seeping down one’s neck and 
into one’s boots. I rather believe that windproof material 
was used more extensively on our expedition than on any 
previous expedition to the Antarctic How very effective 
this windproof material is can be appreciated only by a 
person who has faced a biting wind with and without it. 

The sleeping bags were mostly made from reindeer skin, 


Kotn, RUCKER AND JUNE AT WORK, 


FRANK T. Davigs, Physicist. 


CIVILIZATION DOES NOT MATTER 237 


and were covered with windproof material. Sleeping bags 
were at once the joy and the torment of the camp. I doubt 
whether there were any two that were alike. Each man 
modelled his according to his personal theories, with the result 
that some slept with untroubled serenity and warmth and others 
complained of cold all winter long. My bag had a cover 
which fitted snugly and had a zipper arrangement so that it 
could be drawn closely about the throat, thus preventing the 
warm air from escaping. Braathen, on the other hand, built 
his bag with a complicated arrangement of straps and flaps 
by means of which it could be altered at will. It was the 
most intricate thing of its kind that I have ever seen, and 
getting into it was like putting on a full dress uniform. But 
it worked. 

Enough clothes to keep warm, enough food to eat, a few 
things to divert the mind occasionally—these are the only 
things that are required in the Antarctic. It is amazing what 
contentment can be had from them. “What do you miss 
most in the Antarctic, Taffy?” T asked our physicist. He 
replied, “Temptation.” 


CHAPTER XI 
MORE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 


“Burt you will come away hating one another. The win- 
ter night will be a dreadful bore.” Thus, our well-meaning 
friends as we started south. Now hate is an emotional state 
that may be acquired anywhere, in a Fifth Avenue drawing 
room as easily as in a Siberian garrison—more easily, I dare 
say. And boredom is a surfeited state of mind that has no 
connection with lines of longitude. Hate? No, we had little 
of that. There were passing irritations, of course—most of 
them mild, a few intense. Some, it is true, lasted a long time. 
One man may have talked too much, to the occasional distaste 
of several of his fellows. Another had an ungovernable tend- 
ency to lose everything he needed.the next moment, and would 
turn the camp topsy-turvy until he recovered it. And still 
another insisted on telling long, elaborate and (to many) 
pointless yarns. One or two men were undeniably lazy and this 
was irritating to all hands. 

The great balancing force was the strength of loyalty that 
infused the organization. Even the lazy man sincerely and 
keenly wished the expedition to succeed and I should prefer 
a laggard who sincerely liked his expedition to an energetic 
man who is unable to give loyalty to anything—not even him- 
self. There are such men, but fortunately we had none of 
them. Otherwise, our government could not have lasted. 
But show me a group of men who have lived for a year in un- 
broken harmony, whose gorges have failed to rise ever so 
faintly at these very same nuisances or similar ones, and I shall 
have the doubtful privilege of seeing inhuman dolts. 

Boredom? Certainly we were bored at times. There were 
for all of us periods toward the end of winter when it seemed 
that time stood still, and the spring and the sun would never 
come. But those were rare occasions. We were so taken up 

238 


MORE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 239 


with special tasks that had to be done that spring seemed to be 
rushing at us, and the night too short to allow us time for 
leisure, much less to be bored. 

Bear in mind that the men who went south with me were 
unusual men, picked from thousands, and for the most part 
were keen men, with an interest in the unusual. A few were 
brilliant, most were above the average, and the rest were the 
type of men you can find anywhere and everywhere, doing the 
routine and the odd jobs of the world with steady sureness. 
Some were students, with a passionate love of knowledge for 
knowledge’s sake, and some would not have given a pin for all 
the knowledge you could pack in the City of New York. Some 
could take a piece of wood, a bolt of cloth, or a fragment of 
metal and turn it into the neatest and most ingenious contri- 
vance an exploring party might wish for, and there were others 
who could not keep a fire going if their lives depended upon 
it. Some were of the virile, out-of-doors type, to whom 
“roughing it” was a pleasure, and others hated it as a meager 
and limited existence, and refused to venture far from the 
stoves until spring came. 

But every one of them had a special thing which I thought 
he did well, or he had an especially fine character that fitted 
well with our scheme of things. Otherwise he would not have 
been there. They were prepared to suffer hardships. Had 
they not, they certainly would not have come. They were 
willing to endure them without the reward of personal gain. 
Still they came. These men were not sentimentalists. They 
were men who had been around, and could penetrate to the 
true nature of things. And because of the common interest, 
the common objective and the common keenness, they were 
capable of a loyalty, tolerance and vivacity that are rarely 
found except under these circumstances. I had to smile when 
told that presumably sophisticated New York magazines were 
inclined to regard them as Rover Boys. Sophistication, I 
take it, consists of finding more and more fine things to hold 
up for ridicule by and before intelligences that are too lazy or 
dishonest to investigate the facts. Least of all they were that. 
They were a3 a group the most unafraid men I have ever met. 

Some persons have a queer way of looking at things. Sur- 
prising as it may seem, we did not enter the Antarctic to 
create a newspaper story or to develop a motion picture. 


240 LITTLE AMERICA 


Hardly. We were in search of information, information that 
had perhaps no immediate practical usefulness, but that was 
certainly of great value to science. 

Now surely it was worth while to prepare extensively so 
as to bring pioneering, which is undeniably hazardous, to as 
low an order of risk and discomfort as is possible. Half the 
labor of mankind is directed toward finding a more efficient 
and less dangerous way of doing things. Yet the head of an 
immense corporation said on our return: “You did your 
job too easily. It lacked hardships and tragedy.” Rubbish! 

No Antarctic journey, whether by air or by surface, is 
easy. Too many fine men have died, too many more have 
suffered hardships beyond the ability of other men to describe, 
to permit that statement to stand. Of course aerial explora- 
tion of the polar regions is vastly less troublesome and very 
much faster than sledging. But each has its particular risks, 
which are obvious enough not to require definition here: 
enough to say that the gain in comfort and speed that the air- 
plane provides is offset somewhat, at least at this period in its 
development, by the independence of ground travel from all 
but the worst kind of weather and its comparative security 
from all but the worst kinds of hazards. 

So often we make the mistake of believing that because 
a mission is executed with sureness and without mishap it 
must have been easy. The history of polar exploration is full 
of contrasts. Witness the southern journeys of Scott and 
Amundsen. For years it was the practice of certain critics 
to minimize the risk and the difficulties in Amundsen’s dash 
to the Pole. Even Scott, on being confronted by the Nor- 
wegians’ tracks a few miles to the Pole, decided hastily they 
must have found an easier way. 

The two parties, Amundsen’s returning north after reach- 
ing the Pole, Scott’s still pressing desperately southward, 
passed each other unseen about 75 miles apart on the polar 
plateau; and what a picture that must have made, were there 
an eye to take in both. On the one hand a party moving 
rapidly and surely according to plan, always op schedule, 
always confident, light of heart and full in stomach. And on 
the other hand a party lifting itself from one superhuman 

*“Scott’s Last Journey,” vol. i, p. 374. 


MORE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 241 


effort into another, from one crisis to another, exhausted by 
attrition, hunger and storm, weakened by injuries, their endur- 
' ance falling steadily behind their needs, until at last they 
perished, all of them, on the trail. 

Amundsen’s journey was perhaps the easier one. It was so 
for several reasons. He chose dogs for transport, whereas 
Scott, who had little faith in dogs, threw in his lot with Man- 
churian ponies. Amundsen also took his risks. He was the 
first man to dare to winter on the Barrier: and in doing so re- 
duced his southern journey by 100 miles. This, was a bold 
stroke recommended by judgment. And, finally, he cut out for 
himself an entirely new route to the Pole, with all the risks in- 
volved in that choice, whereas Scott knew what he had to face, 
as he pursued the route by means of which Shackleton had come 
within 97 miles of the Pole in 1908. 

This is no criticism of the gallant Scott. There were vari- 
ables in his problem that no one, save the excellent men who 
lie with him in his whitened sepulchre, are qualified to deter- 
mine. In dying, in failing, he gave the world something much 
more worth while than success, He gave it an intellectual 
experience worth the attainment of a dozen South Poles. 

But let us bear with the living. There can be only one 
Scott, and martyrdom, whatever our distinguished critic might 
have thought, was not to be our destiny, if we could help it. 
We were humble workers, as afraid to fail as we were eager 
to succeed. “Victory awaits him who has everything in order— 
luck, people call it? Defeat is certain for him who has neg- 
lected to take the necessary precautions in time: this is called 
bad luck.” 1 Even so, She caprices of the polar regions may 
upset the best laid plans. 

The hours and hours we spent in working out every detail 
of the planning that preceded every journey can be taken as 
evidence of the care with which we approached these par- 
ticular problems. Nothing was left to chance. Committees 
were appointed to investigate all propositions, and to work out 
the most feasible plan of operations and the most effective 
equipment with which to accomplish the job. We had with us 
one of the best polar libraries in the world, and this was used 
extensively, to supply information that we lacked in personal 


1 Amundsen, “The South Pole,” i, 370. 


242 LITTLE AMERICA 


experience. By the end of winter the volumes on the Ashagc- 
tic had been worn shabby and were discolored from unin- 
terrupted use. 

There was, for example, the committee on the Polar 
Flight, consisting of Balchen, McKinley, June, Smith, Parker 
and myself; mechanics Bubier, Demas and Roth sat in on these 
conferences and gave us valuable advice. This committee had 
pe Cha3k of working out the specific operation of getting She 
Ford to the Pole and back. This was no mere matter of gass- 
ing it up, and flying there and back. Apart from the diffi- 
culties of navigation, which must be anticipated and prepared 
for, there were scores of problems on the proper solution of 
which would rest the success of the flight. How much fuel 
and oil would be required to accomplish the flight? What con- 
stituted a safe reserve? What was the maximum weight that 
could be allowed for emergency food and sledge equipment in 
case of a forced landing? What was the minimum that could 
be taken, to insure the safe return of personnel? How much 
weight could be allowed for engine repair equipment in case a 
forced landing can be made without injury to the plane? What 
separate courses of procedure would be most effective for relief 
of the Polar Party in case of a forced landing some distance 
from the base: (a) for the Polar Flight group, (b) for the 
base party and (c) for the dog parties in the field? 

These were but a few of the problems that bore on this 
single undertaking: and the pros and cons were argued and 
discussed all through the winter night, before the final plan 
was drafted. 

Perhaps it would be interesting to sit in, for a few mo- 
ments, on one of the sessions of this committee. It convened 
after supper generally in the library, which served also as my 
office. Three sides of the library were taken up by shelves, on 
which Owen had neatly stacked the books. The only picture on 
the wall was that of Floyd Bennett, for whom we named the 
Polar plane. It was draped with an American flag. Near the 
center was a small caboose stove which threw off a ruddy glow. 
In one corner was Lofgren’s desk, and in another was Owen’s 
with his portable typewriter on it. There were three different 
types of collapsible chairs. We were jammed rather closely 
together, as the library was only about twelve feet square. 
Often a blizzard, which raked the Barrier mercilessly, howled 


MORE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 243 


and moaned in the ventilator, a sound like nothing else on 
this earth. 

Even intimate friends would scarcely have recognized in 
the group the men who had started from the United States. 
June’s luxuriant black beard gave him such a convincing re- 
semblance to General Grant that one looked quickly for the 
loose-fitting campaign coat, and the right hand hanging limply 
at the lapel. No less startling was Smith’s resemblance to 
Lincoln, for his beard was cut in the same way, and his tall, 
loosely-hung body and high brow were more than a passing 
parallel. Were it not for the heavy clothes which we all wear 
this might have been a conference in a campaign shack on the 
Potomac. In spite of the warmth of the stove, there was 
always a cold draught circulating about one’s back and feet 
when the wind is blowing. 

Byrd: “It would now appear definite that the Polar 
flight cannot be made non-stop.” 

Balchen, with a smile at McKinley: “Not unless we make 
McKinley walk. His weight and food and extra clothes and 
the weight of the camera and film make the difference. If we 
took gasoline instead we could do it.” 1 

McKinley, with a broader smile: “If I wasn’t partially 
deaf, I would knock you down for that, Bernt.” 

Byrd: “Well, we can’t get around that. McKinley and 
his camera have to go. Mapping the area between the base 
and the Pole is as important, to our purposes, as reaching the 
Pole itself. Let’s make this definite: hereafter, in all calcu- 
lations the weight of McKinley and his camera are to be con- 
sidered essential load.” 

Balchen: “Of course the limiting factor on the range of 
the polar flight is the ceiling of the Ford. If we expect to 
clear the ‘Hump, ? we should have a minimum service ceil- 


11 confess that this dialogue has been edited. No stenographic form 
could hope to catch Balchen’s charming accents and his experiments in 
syntax, and none would dare repeat the emphatic expletives which sooner 
or later become accepted words in the polar idiom. 

* The “Hump” is the name we conferred upon that part of the Queen 
Maud Range which we hoped to hurdle. In our calculations for the 
flight, we decided to climb the Axel Heiberg Glacier, more or less follow- 
ing Amundsen’s path, because it appeared to present, according to Amund- 
sen’s surveys, the lowest stairway to the plateau. The height of the pass 
was estimated to be 10,500 feet. Surrounding it were the great peaks of 


244. LITTLE AMERICA 


ing 1 of 11,000 feet. The maximum load that will give that ser- 
vice ceiling is, if I recall correctly, 12,500 pounds. If we take 
off with a load of say 14,500 pounds, we will use up the dif- 
ference in fuel on the way to the Mountains. We have worked 
out the Ford’s range both graphically and with Brequet’s 
formula as modified by Diehl, and they check, giving a range, 
with the gasoline and the heavy load of equipment we must 
carry, of about 1700 miles. That’s not enough to take us from 
Little America to the Pole and back. But if we plan to lay down 
a base in the vicinity of Queen Maud Mountains it would give 
us a fuel reserve of about 15 percent over needs from Little 
America to the Pole and back to the mountain base.” 

Smith: “I don’t think it would be wise to attempt the 
flight, non-stop or with two stops, with less than a 20 percent 
factor of safety. If we meet head winds, we'll be out of luck. 
Winds are so changeable down here that we may have head 
winds both going in and coming out. What do you make the 
distance to the Pole?” 

Balchen: ‘820 miles.” 

Byrd: “I make it 790. Well, we must get this more 
accurately, and run some careful fuel and altitude tests next 
spring. We tay get an improved or lesser performance down 
here. So our figures now must be tentative. Taking every- 
thing into consideration—food, tools, sledges, medical sup- 
plies, tents, scientific gear, radio, etc—what do you estimate to 
be the minimum take-off load from Little America ?” 

Balchen: “About 14,500 pounds, maybe a little more.” 

Byrd: “Gye got it nearly to that figure.” 

June: “We have now figured out that a month’s supply 
of food is enough, allowing 75 pounds of food per man.” 

Byrd: “Not enough. We would be foolish to start with 
less than two months’ supply, and I prefer three. We cannot 


Ole Engelstad, Don Pedro Cristopherson and Nansen, rising from 15,000 
to 19,000 feet, according to Amundsen. 

"By service ceiling is meant the altitude at which an airplane has still 
the capacity of a rate of climb of 100 feet per minute. Absolute ceiling 
is that altitude at which it can climb no farther. These quantities change, 
naturally, with a given plane according to load and horsepower. Owing 
to the great elevations with which we had to contend, we were reluctant 
to diminish the service ceiling below this point lest we meet strong winds 
in the pass or over the plateau, in which case we would require a generous 
reserve of horsepower to climb or maneuver out of danger. 


MORE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 245 


afford to experiment with food. Man-hauling is the toughest 
kind of pulling. If we are forced down at the Pole, or near 
it, it will take us at least two months to walk back to the base 
of the mountains, and we might not be able to do it at all with 
any amount of food. If Amundsen were here he would say 
it couldn’t be done. I have talked this over with him a num- 
ber of times. He had no faith in men man-hauling long dis- 
tances, specially without depots, and pulling on a plateau 
10,000 feet high. Dean, will you please read Shackleton’s, 
Scott’s and Mawson’s books, and draw up in table form the 
distances that have been travelled by man-hauling? We are 
probably over-estimating our abilities.” 

McKinley: ‘Personally, Im in favor of two flights—a 
base-laying fight and the polar flight. It will give me two 
chances to photograph the Queen Maud Range. Visibility 
may be so poor on the polar flight, if it is tried non-stop, that 
we won't be able to get decent pictures. But from your point 
of view, two flights are not good. It will involve two landings 
away from base.” 

Byrd: “Well, the second is the lesser of two risks. Sup- 
pose we do put down a base at the foot of the Queen Maud 
Range, to be picked up on the return from the Pole. We 
ought to be able to cache enough gasoline to make a flight over 
Carmen Land before returning to Little America. That is, if 
weather permits. We could then make two flights in one. Be- 
sides, with a lessened load we ought to be able to improve per- 
formance on the plateau.” 

Parker: “Where do you believe the base ought to be pue?” 

Smith; “About 400 or 500 miles out, and I'm in favor 
of putting it right at the foot of Axel Heiberg Glacier, if we 
can find a smooth place. It will be easier to find and, on the 
flight back, we won’t have to fly so far to reach it. The dis- 
tance is about 350 miles, I think. Now the limiting factor on 
the base-laying flight is the amount of load we can land safely 
at this base. It would be hazardous, in my opinion, to try to 
land with a load of much over 13,000 pounds. To land with 
more would put a wicked strain on the ship.” 

Balchen: “We figured we could land with 13,000 pounds. 
We allowed a month’s supply of food for four men for emer- 
gency on this flight, and considered 450 miles as the distance 
of the base from Little America. Weight of the plane, less 


246 LITTLE AMERICA 


gasoline and with all other essential load, in rough figures, is 
8,490 pounds. Gasoline required for flying 800 miles, plus 
20 percent safety factor, is 2,800 pounds, assuming consump- 
tion of 53 gallons per hour. Total, 11,290 pounds. If we 
take-off with a load of 14,500 pounds, that leaves us 3,210 
pounds for gasoline and oil to be dropped at the depot, which 
is equivalent to 500 gallons of gasoline and 25 gallons of oil. 
We will use about 1,500 pounds of fuel flying to the base. 
Our landing load then will be about 13,000 pounds. We can 
get away with that.” 

Byrd: “I don’t see how we can allow for less that 440 
miles to the base. Here is my list of ideal equipment for the 
base-laying flight.” 


Pounds 

Weight of plane, with cranks, tools, etc. 6,710 
Additional tools 18 
2 blow torches 60 
2 motor covers and funnels 34 
Radio 109 
Survey camera 100 
Motion picture camera 40 
Food, 4 men, two months, at 69.05 Ibs. per man 

per month ` 552.40 
Sledge equipment, plus clothes both reserve 

and worn 624 
4 men, not including clothes 700 
Plane navigation equipment 36.50 
Miscellaneous equipment 50 
25 gals. oil at 8 lbs. per gal. 200 
Gas for goo miles at 6 Ibs. per gal., and con- 

sumption of 52 gals. per hour, with 20% 

safety factor 3,370 

Total 12,603.90 


“Even with a take-off load of 14,600 pounds, we then 
could only carry about 2,000 pounds of oil and gasoline to 
the Ba3e.” 

June: “The amount of gasoline you can cache also de- 
pends upon whether you carry it in cans alone, or in cans held 
in boxes. In 5 gallon cans, the gasoline averages 7 pounds per 
gallon; with the boxes, 9 pounds per gallon. If the field is 


bumpy, you ought to have boxes. The cans won’t stand much 
pounding around.” 


} 


MORE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 247 


Byrd: “We shall figure on that later. But first of all, let 
us figure out our needs for the polar flight, and from that work 
backward to the base-laying flight. Here’s my list of ideal 
equipment for this flight : 


Pounds 

Plane with skis, fire extinguishers, cranks, 

tools, etc. 6,728 
3 blow torches 85 
3 motor covers and oil funnels 50 
Radio, not including sledge radio 109 
Aerial survey camera 100 
Motion picture camera 40 
Food, 4 men, 3 months 828.60 
4 men (not including clothes worn 700 
Sledge equipment (includes clothes worn) 624 
Gasoline for 1,200 miles, allowing 20% 

safety factor, 780 gallons 4,680 
50 gallons of oil 400 
Large and small chronometers 6 
Operative and ship compass 14 
Extra sun compass I 
30 smoke bombs 15 
Miscellaneous (not anticipated) 50 

Total take-off load {%14,430.6 

ch 


“We may assume an average speed of too m.p.h. The 
distance from Little America to the Pole is approximately 790 
miles, and back to the mountain base 1135 miles. That means 
11.35 hours flying time, if all goes well. If we take 780 
gallons of gasoline from Little America, we shall have enough 
for 15 hours, or 3.65 hours above expected needs. That gives 
us a safety factor of 24%. We shall then have 190 gallons 
of gas in She tanks. If we carry out the schedule for the base- 
laying flight, there will be an additional 265 gallons which 
can be picked up there, or a total of 455 gallons, equivalent to 
8.7 hours. With that amount, we could make a 100 mile 
flight to the East, to investigate Carmen Land, and return to 
Little America with a safety factor of 25%. That ought to 
be about what we want.” 

Parker: “I think that some of your weights are too high. 
The weight you give for sledging equipment can be reduced, 
and also the repair equipment.” 


248 LITTLE AMERICA 


Byrd: “We ought to get correct figures on these things 
immediately. Harold, you start the fellows moving on this. 
Hanson has promised to give me the exact weights on the 
radio equipment within the next few days. Blackie ought to 
be able to help you with the other things. Every item must 
be weighed carefully, even to the fractions. If it is possible, 
we ought to try to get away from here with a take-off load of 
less than 14,500 pounds for the base-laying flight." By cut- 
ting down equipment to bare necessities, and reducing the 
rations to two months, we can reduce the weight to 13,800. 
But I am not sure that this skimping is wise.” 

Balchen: “Smith and I have worked up the performance 
tables, and they show that we can’t expect very much in case 
of engine failure on the plateau. If one of the engines fail 
while we are over the plateau we shall have to come down. 
Whether we can bring down that heavy load safely on the 
rough surface is doubtful.” 

Parker: “A single-engined plane would be the most effi- 
cient plane for this hop. The fact that we have three engines 
will offer no protection on the plateau. If any one of the 
engines stops, we shall have to come down. As a matter of fact, 
the risk of a forced landing on the plateau is substantially in- 
creased with three engines over a single engine. There are 
three that might fail instead of one. And there is little gain 
in safety to compensate for it. 

McKinley: “It’s a pity we lost the Fokker.” 

Smith: “Well, we can still greater improve performance 
here by decreasing the pay load.” 

Byrd: “All right. Let’s see what we need. Harold, what 
is the minimum weight you allow for tools?” 

And so it went on, as Mr. Webster’s comic strip says, long 
into the (winter) night, until reams of paper had been covered 
` with scribbling and figures, and the library was blue with to- 
bacco smoke. 

Meanwhile, Professor Gould and his aides were working 
out the journey of the Southern Party, which became known 
as the Geological Party. The planning of this journey was 
no less complicated than that of the Polar flight. The pur- 


*The reason for this is probably already clear. A lessened load meant 


less strain on the skis at the take-off, better performance in flight and an 
increased ceiling. 


MORE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 249 


poses of this journey were several. Primarily, the party 
i proposed to make extended glaciological and geological studies 
in the central area of Queen Maud Range, in Carmen Land 
and in the unnamed highlands which Amundsen had noted 
between Latitudes 81° and 82° 5.1 The Queen Maud Range 
was one of the most important places left in the world to 
investigate geologically. Then it would be a great help to 
have the party in the vicinity of our base at the foot of Queen 
Maud Range before the polar flight was attempted for two 
reasons: (1) to relay daily weather reports to Little America, 
so that Haines might be able to predict with greater certainty 
the weather conditions we were likely to meet in the flight: 
and (2) to stand by as a relief unit in the event of failure 
of the flight. Altogether the scope of the Southern Party 
was one of the most extensive and significant single efforts of 
the expedition. 

The physical difficulties alone involved in the journey 
would be great. It called for 1,300 miles of sledging, and, 
if successful, would be one of the longest and most important 
sledge trips on record made in the interest of pure science. 

The objects of this journey were considered so important 
that during the winter night the activities of the entire camp 
revolved about its preparation. It was planned that they 
should leave on the main advance about the middle of October. 
The Supporting Party, which would assist the Geological 
Party in advancing its loads out, was to start about two weeks 
earlier. Next to the routine scientific work, the preparations 
for this journey took precedence over everything else. Proper 
preparation was absolutely essential, for the reason that none 
of the men who would compose the two parties, with the 
exception of Mr. Walden, had had any previous experience in 
long-distance sledging. Walden was a veteran dog musher 
of the old school, and had had a great deal of experience 
hauling freight in Alaska. But this experience, of course, 


1 Amundsen, quoting from his diary of January 18, on the return from 
the Pole, described sighting again at Lat. 81° 20’ the pressure ridges he had 
seen on the way out, and behind them a great mass of ridges and peaks, 
running northeast and southwest, as far as the eye could see. “Great was 
our surprise when, a short time later, we made out high bare land in the 
same direction, and not long after that two lofty white summits to the 
southeast, probably in about (Lat.) 82° 5”. Amundsen, “The South Pole”, 


li, p. 170. 


250 LITTLE AMERICA 


had nothing to do with the intricate planning of food, tents, 
cookers, distribution of loads, bases, et cetera, which are 
essential to a prolonged sledging trip in the Antarctic. 

But these two parties were fortunate in having the two 
geniuses—the machinist Czegka, and the tailor Ronne—to 
help them. They worked at fever heat during the winter to 
turn out material for both the Supporting Party and the 
Geological Party. In fact, every man in the camp was behind 
these operations, and it was one of the most splendid co- 
operative efforts I have ever had the privilege of seeing. 
June, for example, placed his mechanical talents unreservedly 
at their disposal, and Demas slept out doors in a tent during 
some of the coldest nights in order to get information by 
means of which the troublesome accumulation of ice in rein- 
deer sleeping bags might be defeated. From beginning to 
end, the project was a matter of infinite detail, the smallest 
unit of which could not be ignored. 

Space does not permit of a full recital of the planning 
that went into the development of this unit. It is possible 
to do no more than hint at them. As we grappled with the 
intricacies of load on the polar and base-laying flights, so 
Gould and his men were at grips with the same enemy, but 
in a different dress. Food—just enough of it, no more, po 
less than was absolutely necessary—was their problem. They 
would be out nearly three months, and had to feed not only 
six men, but also 54 dogs. If we racked our brains on the 
problem of laying down a single base, they tortured theirs 
in the planning of eight. In planning the polar flight, we 
weighed time almost down to the seconds. They doled it 
out in days, then hours. Time is the universal measurement 
in the Antarctic. For us, hours spoke for gasoline, gasoline 
meant flight, and flight meant accomplishment and also safety. 
For them, days spoke for food, and food for everything. 

Buried in the snow behind our colony we had a finished 
and excellent vehicle to carry us whither we planned: it needed 
only the application of mathematics, about eighteen hours of 
good weather and perhaps a bit of boldness and good fortune 
to see it through. They had to build their sledges, and if 
weather would inconvenience them only when excessively bad 
over long periods, certainly they had need of boldness—great 


MORE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 251 


boldness, resourcefulness and unremitting physical effort— 
Cho see them through. We were fortunate in knowing our 
jobs more or less exactly: airplanes and flights were our 
particular business, and the fundamentals had been drilled 
into us. Long-distance sledging was a new thing to them. 
However, they made it their business during the winter, por- 
ing over books until they knew them nearly by heart. And 
if, when they started, their knowledge was partly the theoret- 
ical knowledge of the academician, at least they knew what 
it was all about. 

Sledges? They experimented with a dozen different 
models and a hundred different lashings until they developed 
the types they believed would best serve their needs. Many, 
many intricate details had to be worked out. For example, 
what shall be the height of the framework above the snow? 
If too low, the framework may not clear a rough surface, and 
if the snow is soft, the runners will sink, the framework 
will drag and pulling will be beastly hard. Yet if too high, 
a heavily-loaded sledge will capsize with exasperating per- 
sistency. Well, shall the height be six inches, seven or eight? 
What proportion of the surface shall come in contact with 
the snow? If too much, pulling may be terribly hard, 
especially in cold weather, for then the snow is like sand- 
paper. If too little, then the sledges will sink in soft snow. 
Very well, let us see what Nansen, Scott, Peary, Amundsen, 
Rasmussen, Shackleton and the others have to say on the 
subject? And what does Walden think? A good sledge is 
a beautiful and efficient thing. It must be rigid in its frame- 
work, yet flexible enough to give when travelling over a 
rough surface, so that the whole strain shall not come 
on any single part of the sledge. This is vital. It is by no 
means a simple vehicle. The efficiency of sledges varies 
according to its number of factors: its length, weight 
carried, surface conditions, workmanship, etc. All these 
things must be estimated. 

After a series of conferences with Dr. Gould, the following 
memorandum was issued dividing into departments the research 
which was necessary for this and allied problems, and the 
work was assigned as follows: 


252 LITTLE AMERICA 
MEMORANDUM Xo. 36 


The following are given duties as stated opposite their 
names : 


Southern Party: 


In command Larry Gould 
Dogs, dog food and man food Dr. Coman 
O’Brien 
L. Gould 
Detailed list, with weights of material Vaughan 
to be taken on each sledge O’Brien 
L. Gould 
Bases, safety precautions L. Gould 
Vaughan 
Skis Thorne 
Sledges L. Gould 
Strom 
Balchen 
Tents, whips, harnesses and gang lines Goodale 
Food cases, sleigh sheets Crockett 
Navigation and flags L. Gould 
O’Brien 
Radio L. Gould 
Petersen 
Sleeping bags Thorne 
Crockett 
Goodale 
Clothing (all but foot gear and gloves) Vaughan 
Devising methods of keeping clothing Thorne 
dry Vaughan 
Goodale 
Crockett 
Foot gear Thorne 
Vaughan 
Gloves Goodale 
Crockett 
Arrangement of tents L. Gould 
Goodale 
Trace Protection Thorne 


de Ganahl 


MORE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 253 


Problems of the same nature, if of lesser magnitude, 
faced the Supporting Party, whose job it was to precede the 
Geological Party in the field and lay down four bases, at inter- 
vals of about 50 miles, on a journey which would carry it 200 
miles south, through the most dangerous crevasses met by 
Amundsen and his party on their entire Polar trip. In a 
sense, the success of the Supporting Party would largely 
influence the success of the Geological Party, for the latter 
would be dependent upon these depots. The duties were 
divided as follows: the assignments being worked out with 
de Ganahl and Walden. 


Supply Officer (for both parties) Black 
Supporting party: 
Sledges Walden 
Strom 
Bursey 
Dogs Bursey 
Dog food, man food and navigation de Ganahl 
Siple 
Skis and harness Braathen 
Safety precautions Strom 
de Ganahl 
Siple 
Tents Walden 
Strom 
Radio de Ganahl 
Bases, sleeping bags, clothing, keeping de Ganahl 
clothing dry, etc. (will cooperate with Braathen 
and make use of data worked up by Siple 
Southern Party) 
Fuel and Cooker for both parties Gould 
Czegka 
Mulroy 
Medical kit, both parties Dr. Coman 


Each person charged with a duty such as safety precautions, 
methods of keeping clothing dry, arrangement of tents, sledges, 
etc., is requested to write out ideas in detail, for discussion with 
all members of the party. If agreement cannot be reached, the 
minority opinion will be included in the report. Lofgren will 


then compile a booklet. 
B. E. BYRD. 


pan LITTLE AMERICA 


The fruits of the many efforts were scores of conferences 
and, finally, a most comprehensive booklet prepared under 
Dr. Gould’s direction, which described in detail the proposed 
operations of both parties, the procedure by which they were 
to be carried out, and the methods by which the expected 
difficulties of the trail might be solved. It was an excellent 
job, concise and compact, the product of great thought and 
planning. 

Let us pause a moment to look into the plan. 

The Supporting Party, which we planned would depart 
south about the second week in October, had several func- 
tions. The major task, of course, was to lay down a series 
of depots, from which the Geological Party might replenish 
its supplies both on the way out and back. It was essential 
that the Geological Party, which faced a much longer journey, 
should travel as light as possible. Its second responsibility 
was to make a trail, especially through the crevassed areas 
that Amundsen reported at Lat. 81° 7’. 

These depots were to be placed as follows: 


Miles from 
Position Little America ` 
Depot No. t Lat 79? 2715 44 
Depot Ko. 2 Lat. 80° 10' 5 93 
Pepo: Xo. 3 Lat. 81° OO 5 143 
Depot No. 4 Lat. 81° 45' 5 188 


After putting down Depot No. 4, the Supporting Party 
was then to turn back and return to the base. Then the 
Geological Party, which would meanwhile have started south, 
would press along the trail, picking up the man food and the 
dog food cached in the depots, to replace amounts used during 
the journey, and from Depot No. 4 on, it would lay its own 
bases. These depots were to be placed at: 


Miles from 
A Position Little America* 
epot No. 5 Lat, 82° SSS 238 
Depot No. 6 Gac 83% 26'S 288 
Depot No. 7 Tana yy 338 
Depot No. 8 Lat. 85° oo’ 5 383 


* These figures represent geological miles. 


MORE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 255 


The need for the extension of the depot system is, per- 
haps, self-evident. A polar expedition, like an army travel- 
‚ ling through a ravished country, must carry its cwn supplies. 
It cannot forage. It cannot even expect to meet an occasional 
animal, as in the Arctic. To attempt to carry its rations 
throughout the journey would be a herculean task, even if 
men and dogs could go through with it. So the depot system 
becomes the inescapable alternative for a long journey. As 
most trips of this kind are pursued more or less on a straight 
line to a definite objective, the problem of establishing depots 
is not particularly difficult. The needs of the party, both 
of men and dogs, are carefully computed, and definite amounts 
are cached at définite distances on She outward—or, in this 
case, southern—journey. These can be picked up on the 
return journey, so that the party, on its way back to the 
base, need be carrying only enough food, plus a determined 
amount for emergency, to see them from depot to depot. 
In short, if all went well, by the time of the polar flight we 
should have a well-marked line of communication to the 
Queen Maud Range, for the support not only of the Geo- 
logical Party but of the Polar Flight Party as well, if it 
came to a cropper. 

Of course, there must always be an element of risk in 
the most conservatively computed plan of this kind. A pro- 
tracted blizzard, failure in dog or man power, the meeting of 
unexpected difficulties can play hob with the schedule, and 
the history on polar exploration is full of distressing inci- 
dents growing out of the “unexpected.” Unless the schedule 
is sufficiently flexible to take up slack, the time may come, 
if hard luck befalls the party, when hunger, then suffering 
and even death exact the toll. As with the Polar Flight 
plan, the time schedule for the Geological Party was worked 
out with an allowance of 20 percent as a safety factor, for 
bad weather and other unavoidable delays. Amundsen, under 
similar conditions, allowed 18 percent and in spite of much 
bad weather found this to be more than adequate. However, 
Amundsen was one of the fastest and most resourceful of 
sledge travellers, and the Geological Party was inclined, quite 
wisely, to rate itself considerably below his par. 

Again, we were fortunate in that we brought to the Antarc- 
tic our own rescue parties. If the dog teams failed, aviation 


256 


was there to back them up: and vice versa. 


LITTLE AMERICA 


This, I believe, 


was one of the most effective weapons in our hands. 


The schedule was as follows: 


(The time intervals indi- 


cate that which was allowed for travelling from depot to 


depot. ) 
Southward Northward* 
Depot No. I 3.5 days 1.5 days 
Depot No. 2 3la 15° 
Depot No. 3 ka v 20.04 
Depot No. 4 3ad 20 “ 
Depot No. 5 dB em 10.0 7 2 
Depot No. b ako. 20 “ 
Pepo! Xo. 7 a 20 “ 
Depot No. 8 DB! 3.0 
28 days 24 days 
Other time allowances: 
To stand by at base for Polar Flight 7 days 
For geological exploration k he 
Return journey 28“ 
Southern journey 2R 
Total go days 


The expected consumption of man and dog food on the 
southern trip, together with reserves, cached for the return 
trip, were calculated as follows : 


To Dog Food Dog Food 
Depot Consumption Cached 
No.1 236 lbs. 45 lbs 
No. 2 EO 609 
No. 3 236 5 baba 
No. 4 2304 ova 
No. 5 25655 co S 
No. 6 210“ C3 
No. 7 ato y CE 
No.8 210 Gane 

1810 lbs. 720 lbs. 


Man Food 
Consumption 


47.04 lbs. 
47.04 “ 

47.04 c 

47.04 
47.04 
47.04 
47.04 
47.04 “ 


376.321 ibs. 


“ 


“ 


“ 


“ 


Man Food 
Cached 


too Ibs. 
o 17 
ta ss 


189 ce 
40 


40 
40 «e 
559 lbs. 


*The reason for the allowance of greater speed in the return journey 
was the expectancy they should be able to travel much faster with lighter 


loads. 


"10 days were allowed here for the side-trip to Amundsen’s reported 


high land. | 


Dressed for 70° 


Below, showing 


face mask. 


Reindeer skin mukluk and canvas overboot. 


iterproof summer mukluks made of seal skin. Ski boot contrasted with ordinary shoe. 


Cot WEATHER CLOTHING, 


ae TINT A =y x ta --77 


(3uposheted Xvodtod) 


“MORE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 257 


The ration was worked out according to the recommenda- 
tions of Dr. Coman, and represented a complete and well 
balanced diet. The total weight of man food requirements 
was computed at 1209.6 pounds. This was the weight of the 
food the Geological Party proposed to carry. Part of it, 
however, was to be relayed by the Supporting Party. In 
addition, there was a reserve of 250 pounds of man food 
which had been deposited in the first depots in 1928—a very 
generous reserve and emergency supply placed where they 
should be most likely to need it—near the end of She home- 
ward trip. 

Calculating the weight of the dog food was an equally 
difficult problem. The main ration we proposed to use was 
the dog pemmican compounded by Dr. Malcolm, which 
theoretically represented a balanced diet. It had never been 
tried before on long journeys in the Antarctic, but we were 
encouraged by the report of Taylor, who had 13 dogs steadily 
sledging on it on Mt. Cook, in New Zealand, that they were 
in excellent shape. During the winter this pemmican was 
put up in cakes of 1.5 pounds, representing a daily ration, so 
that it could be transported easily and distributed with less 
likelihood of error on the trail. | 

Dog food schedules were computed as follows: 


Consumption on Southern Journey 1810 pounds 28 days 


Stand by for Polar Flight 294 7 
Geological Explorations 1008 32 
Return and side trips 720 23 


3832 pounds do days 


Amount of dog food to be taken from Little 


America. by the Supporting Party 378 Ibs. 
To be distributed from caches laid in 1928 780 Ibs. 
Total carried by Geological Party 2674 lbs. 

Total 3832 Ibs. 


The decrease in the consumption of dog food from Depot 
No. 5 on would proceed from the inescapable economy 
practiced on all long-distance sledging trips—namely, the dis- 
position of the worn-out dogs. It is more merciful to put 
them to death than let them die of hunger, roaming the 
Barrier. It may seem cold-blooded—and I suppose it really 


258 LITTLE AMERICA 


is—but a table of expectancy is worked out, like the actuarial 
tables of the life insurance companies, and such a contingency 
must be provided for. It was proposed that the Geological 
Party should depart from Little America with five teams of 
9 dogs each. The following schedule was drawn: 


From Little America to— 


Depot No. 5 5 teams (9 dogs each) 45 dogs 17.5 days 
Depot No. 8 5 teams (8 dogs each) 40 dogs 10.5 “ 

For Polar Flight 4 teams (7 dogs each) 28 dogs 5 
For Exploration 3 teams (7 dogs each) 21 dogs 32 
For Return 3 teams (7 dogs each) 21 dogs 23 


This was the stark necessity, laid bare of sentiment. But 
I shamelessly confess that we hoped to defeat it in a large 
measure. It is a dangerous and an unwise thing for explorers 
to allow their judgment to be swayed by love of these animals 
that serve them, yet we found ourselves in exactly that posi- 
tion. If it was at all possible, the Geological Party proposed 
to maintain four teams of nine dogs each from Depot No. 
8 until the return to the base, and if conditions were favorable 
the aviation unit planned to drop a sufficient quantity of food 
at the mountain base to see most of the dogs through. 

So much for the larger aspects of the journey. 

There was the matter of equipment. 

Camping equipment must be strong enough to withstand 
the hardest kind of handling, and yet light enough not to be 
cumbersome. There are as many different kinds of tents, 
I suppose, as there are explorers. There are two-men tents, 
| three-men tents and four-men tents, and the shapes, sizes and 
weights vary according to the personal predilections of the 
particular school of thought to which an explorer happens to 
belong. We had about a dozen different models that we took 
down, products of my experience in the Arctic, and tents 
used by successful explorers. 

Tents are vital. As with the sledges, we planned to 
make our own tents. We had brought the material south, 
and Goodale was appointed the research specialist on tents. 
He tried out many different types during the winter. The 
qualities which stamped a good tent for a sledging journey 
of this kind are: (1) that every square inch of space shall 


MORE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 259 


be economically employed, (2) that it shall be strong enough 
to withstand a high wind, (3) that it can be well ventilated, 
(4) that it can be put up and struck easily and quickly, (5) 
that it shall be strong enough to withstand the hardest kind of 
handling, and (6) that it should have a color that can be seen 
afar and will also absorb the heat of the sun. 


In the end, we hit upon a design which was called the 


Woods tent, because it so nearly resembled the tent of that 
name which we had brought from the United States. The 
Geological Party actually decided on three types—two of the 
Woods pattern, and a pyramidal tent for cooking designed 
by Ronne. Ronne’s tent was very similar to the tents which 
he had made for Amundsen. It was made of light wind- 
proof material over a framework of bamboo poles and stood 
about 6 feet high. It weighed only 25 pounds. The Woods 
tent was of the same material and approximately the same 
height and weight. Its shape, however, was quite different. 
It was more or less wedge-shaped with a ridge pole running 
its length at the top and bamboo poles in the four corners. 
Its value lay in the fact that it could be put up very quickly 
and though it had no center pole, thus saving space, it was 
very strong. Its entrance was like the sleeve of a coat, the 
opening of which could be tied together after one had crawled 
into the tent. It was, therefore, snow tight. Each tent was 
provided with anchor lines so that it could be tied securely 
to the snow. 

From time immemorial, explorers have had difficulties 
with cookers. The perfect cooker—well, there is no such 
animal, nor can there ever be one. The problem is to get a 
stove that will melt snow in a comparatively short time and 
at the same time burn very little fuel; it should be light, 
strong and easy to start, for time is a most precious element 
on a long sledging trip. The most efficient cooker heretofore 
devised for the trail was the Nansen cooker, invented by the 
great explorer whose name it bears. This cooker is built 
around a two-burner primus, than which there is no more 
reliable burner for the polar regions. But this cooker could 
be improved slightly, we thought, and if a few minutes could 
be saved in the cooking of each meal on the trail, much of 
the hardships inherent in sledging might be reduced. Few 


260 LITTLE AMERICA 


things are more nerve-racking after a day’s hard pulling than 
to sit, in damp clothing, with a bottomless stomach crying 
for something warm and nourishing, waiting for a pitifully 
weak flame to reduce snow to water, then bring water to the 
boiling point. 

The cooker which Czegka devised, with the help of June, 
was, we believe, an improvement on Nansen’s invention, if 
not a great departure from it. It utilized double walls, so 
built that all the heat generated by burners is put to useful 
work before it passes out of the cooker at atmospheric 
temperature. It has three pots—a center pot, holding four 
quarts, a ring pot holding nine and a top pot holding four—in 
which is placed the snow. Spigots are let in the sides, so that 
the water may be drained. The snow in the center pot is 
melted at the end of seven minutes, and begins to boil after 
twelve. About a third of a pot of water is produced. How- 
ever, by this time enough hot water has accumulated in the 
ring and top pots to be drained off the center pot and used to 
fill the center pot. Soup is then cooked in the center pot, 
and, meanwhile, the ring and top pots yield enough water for 
the making of tea. So the soup is distributed, the water 
from the other two pots is transferred again to the center 
pot, and by the time the soup is consumed, a pot of boiling 
water for tea is at their service. In short, a full meal may 
be had in from 30 to 40 minutes. 

It may sound complicated, but it really isn’t. 

Still another device was proposed for sledging. Any one 
familiar with polar literature will know that getting an early 
start in the morning is one of the most difficult tasks of the 
journey. It is hardship enough to quit warm sleeping bags. 
It is torture to wait in the usual huddle for warm food. 
Amundsen, Scott and Shackleton all have spoken, almost in 
despair, of the daily battle to get underway at a seasonable 
hour. Gould decided to have the Geological Party try oatmeal 
for breakfast, which was to be cooked the night before and 
sealed in vacuum buckets, thus insuring warm food immedi- 
ately upon arising. I must confess that I was horrified at 
the idea of “puddling” around with oatmeal on a sledging 
trip. Pemmican, tea, biscuits, chocolate bars and erbswurst 
seemed to me to be enough, but Gould and his men were 


} 


{ 
E MORE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 261 


oughly determined that it could be done, and they were 
rove that they were right. 
[here were many other things that had to be taken, and 
red out with nice precision. Only a person who has taken 
ong sledging journey can appreciate the detail that must 
worked out. Harnesses must be made strong, yet light, 
_a proper amount of reserve equipment taken to replace 
which wears out. Ski poles and needles, theodolites 
{ toilet paper, mitts and trail markers, whisk brooms to 
ash the rime from saennegrass and windproofs, navigation 
truments and even strips of orange cloth to be spread op 
- snow according to the intricate patterns that were devised 
ga means of signalling to the plane in flight. And so on, 
infinitum. 

In all, it was proposed to carry a grand total of 5,368 
unds and 14 ounces, distributed as follows: 


Personal equipment 335165 2 028. 
Man food PEDA IO 
Camp gear and fuel 3a aaa 
Dog food COLDA 
Dog gear BO! 
Extra sledge equipment T2 pu DA 
Navigation, surveying and 

meteorological equipment O 
Skis B po ae 
Trail markers Tao oe. 
Motion picture equipment OB A 
Still camera equipment pavuu" 
Radio gear complete 300 
Safety devices NE O 
Tools ae TYB 


_ A load, then, of 1,073 IBS 12 ozs. per sledge 


“But that’s far too much,’ Mike Thorne protested. “If 
have cold weather at the start, it will be very difficult 
› make good time with such heavy loads.” 

Most of the men were confident, and a few were dubious 
E first, and it was decided that the Geological Party should 
jake a test trip in the spring before the main advance was 
farted to determine whether og not the theories could stand 


262 LITTLE AMERICA 


up against the hard facts of experience. hese preliminary 
spring journeys were to show that in the Antarctic the best 
laid plans are subject to change. 

The planning of spring activities by no means monopolized 
the efforts of the expedition during the winter. The scientific 
staff was constantly at work, especially the magnetician, the 
meteorologists and the radiomen. 

In addition to the ordinary surface observations of pressure, 
temperature, wind, etc., Haines and Harrison made pilot bal- 
loons every day, in a study of the upper circulation of the 
air. Some of these soundings were made to altitudes of 
30,000 feet and more, and are significant in that the unbroken 
series of observations will throw considerable new light upon 
the atmospheric circulation in high southern latitudes, when 
they complete their reports. Curiously, the movements of the 
upper air were found to furnish the only reliable indications 
by which immediate changes in weather might be prophesied. 

Our senior meteorologist had decided that there was no 
sense in being cold if one could avoid it; and when the ther- 
mometer tumbled into the forties, fifties and sixties below zero, 
the devices and schemes by which he enlisted assistants for the 
more disagreeable jobs are past recounting. He would cast 
a covetous eye on our bright young men, a number of whom 
thirsted for knowledge, and by shrewd argument which 
turned, generally, on how a knowledge of meteorology would 
help him get along in the world, would finally lead an un- 
suspecting youth into the cold. 

Not long afterwards the assistant might be seen inflating 
balloons in the Balloon Station, and heating the candles which 
are attached to them so that the balloons can be followed 
through the darkness by theodolite. The candles had frozen 
so hard they had to be warmed before they would burn. AP 
this while, our beloved chief meteorologist might be observed 
huddled in the shelter of the station, out of reach of the 
wind, generous to a fault with sound advice, but painfully 
short on assistance. His success in thus gaining cooperation 
was such as to cause Davies to define him as “the nominative 
of the verb to co-opt.” G shall never forget how Taffy, 
after suffering for weeks under Haines’ amiable tyranny, 
finally applied the same principle to his study of magnetism. 


MORE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 263 


Taffy trained several young men to help him, then sat 
back, in the warmth of the stove to await results. To his 
horror he found them, when he went out to supervise the 
job, working heartily under Haines, who had recognized their 
possibilities and over-night proselyted them to meteorology. 
But, seriously, Haines is one of the most conscientious men 
I have ever known. I can say that because I know him as 
the result of having had him on two expeditions, and the 
dirtiest weather could not prevent him from accumulating an 
immense amount of data which he had set out to get. 
Haines’ and Harrison’s job was full of minor difficulties, 
which sprung from the excessive cold. When the temperature 
reached 60° below, the supposedly non-freezing ink which was 
used in the pens of the self-recording instruments froze so hard 
they would not work. A bit of alcohol and a few drops of 
glycerine were added to the ink, and thereafter the instru- 
ments recorded beautifully during the coldest weather. Once 
a week the record sheets in the thermograph and the hydro- 
graph had to be changed, which required bare hands and 
ruffled more than one disposition. Approaching 70° below zero 
the clocks of the recording instruments failed, even though 
nearly all traces of oil had been removed from the mechanisms ; 
however, after a few adjustments, they worked perfectly. 
Rime and snow often collected in a hard, gritty layer on the 
anemometer cups, producing a slight error in the reading of 
wind velocities; it was necessary to clean them frequently. 
The powdery drift of the blizzard sifted through minute 
cracks in the instruments and not only impeded the move- 
ment of the pens, but often accumulated around the drums 
in quantities large enough to stop the clocks. During the 
worst blizzards of the winter, the meteorological department 
was in its stations most of the time, fussing with clocks and 
instruments, treating them with meticulous solicitude but de- 
ploring the urge that let them be led to the Antarctic. 
Another source of worry was the formation of frost on 
the lenses of the theodolite. Harrison, following the tiny flame 
of the candle as the balloon mounted higher and higher in 
the night, had to scrape off the frost with a small stick every 
few minutes, lest he lose sight of the balloon. During the 
coldest weather, frost occasionally formed on the inside of 


ip 


264 LITTLE AMERICA 


the lens, and there was no remedy except to bring the inst 
ment into the house, take it apart and bake it thoroughly, 

In spite of these handicaps, the instruments functioned | 
well as could be expected under the severe conditions: | 
spite of its wilful perversion of surplus man-power, | 
meteorology department functioned with consistent excellene 
and the records are extremely important and trustworthy. 

The magnetic work was another branch of the scien if 
investigation which was prosecuted throughout the winte 
This work was done under the direction of Physicist Dav 


vided by the Department of Terrestrial Magnetism of ft 
Carnegie Institution, of Washington, D. C. 

The subject of terrestrial magnetism, which concerns 
lines of force that make the earth one huge magnet, is 
vastly important problem of research. About the earth the 
lies a field of magnetic forces the origin of which is st 
unsolved, and science stands doubtful at its boundaries. T! 
problems of magnetism are closely tied to every-day a ay 
Magnetic storms influence wire and radio communication a1 
the exact relationship between magnetic storms and the electi 
cal condition of the atmosphere is unknown and troublesom 
Lack of data concerning magnetic variation and its progre 
sive changes has impeded navigation; on approaching the Ar 
arctic, we had seen for ourselves how unreliable the ship’s cor 
passes had become; in flight they were almost useless. Auror 
displays still defy explanation, and scientists wonder wh 
causes the regular appearance of certain types of aurora a 
their movements, why they occur more frequently at sor 
places than at others, and what relation they bear to magnet 
disturbances. 

How complex and wide this field of research is may 
judged from the fact that despite inquiries that have be 
made all over the earth, the data accumulated has not be 
sufficient to provide a complete explanation of magnet 
phenomena. The most fruitful field for investigation is t 
polar regions, especially the Antarctic. Here magnetic stort 
are more intense than anywhere else, the transient magnet 
and electric variations and storms are more pronounce 
because of the nearness to the magnetic Pole and the chang 


MORE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 265 


in the magnetic force of the earth are considerable over tom- 
paratively small distances. Moreover, because of the strides 
made in allied sciences, particularly relating to correlations 
between magnetism, polar lights, atmospheric electricity, radio 
reception, earth-currents and solar activity, the need of more 
data from the polar regions was pertinent and important. 

This branch of the expedition was fortunate for several 
reasons. Little America was situated far enough from the 
South Magnetic Pole to allow accurate measurements of 
magnetic elements to be continuously recorded. It yy3 well 
situated in the belt of the greatest auroral activity in the south- 
ern hemisphere. And the year 1929 was a particularly prom- 
ising one for magnetic-electrical observations for the reason 
that it coincided more or less with a period of maximum sun- 
spot activity. The previous magnetic and electrical observa- 
tions which were made in the Antarctic, first by the German 
expedition, 1901-1903 and the British expeditions, 1901- 
1904 and 1910-1913, were done ip a period of minimum sun- 
spot activity. 

The observations were made in two huts, one of which 
was for a continuous photographic record of the magnetic 
elements, the other for absolute observations made at intervals 
to fix the values on the photographic records. The first of 
these, which was called the non-magnetic hut, was built in 
the snow about 70 yards south of the main tunnel between 
the houses. Because iron could not be used in the structure, 
“Chips” Gould used only brass and copper nails when he 
made the frame. Then Ronne made a brown tent to fit it. 
The house was entirely buried in the snow for the sake of 
heat insulation, as all experiments with artificial heat proved 
to be more of a nuisance than a help. Nevertheless, the tem- 
perature in the hut on occasions fell as low as 35° below zero. 

In this hut three elements were measured—the declination, 
horizontal intensity and vertical intensity of the earth’s mag- 
netic field. Because the instruments recorded photograph- 
ically, it was necessary to keep the hut in darkness. 

The second observatory, which was used for making 
measurements of absolute values, was nothing more than a 
house of snow blocks, with a canvas roof. As part of the 
observations were astronomical, the hut was above the sur- 


266 LITTLE AMERICA 
face. It was one of the coldest places in Little Ameri 
Each series of observations took from four to five Bosh 


and between the cold and the wild puppies which repeal 


invaded the place, Davies had a dreadful time. Dr. Got 
lessened the burden, however, by volunteering to assist hi 
and they took turns thereafter making observations while 


other held the puppies at bay. The incautious visitor y 


greeted with a shower of ice missiles. $ 

The observatory functioned from May, 1929, to Februa 
1930, and more than 240 daily records were obtained. It 
too early to generalize the results obtained. Magnetic con 
tions were, in general, highly disturbed. The decina ShY 


an arc of 472°. Quiet conditions were the exception, a 
these occurred mostly during the winter and spring. 
angle of dip at Little America in 1929 was 82149 (at 
magnetic Pole it would be 90°), the declination averaged 16; 
east of north, i.e., the direction of the south magnetic Po 
was 17° north of west. 
In addition to the magnetic work, and auroral observ: 
tions, Davies continued the experiments on the determinati | 
of condensation-nuclei which he had begun on the voyelg 
across the Pacific. Nucleation determinations are of grea 
importance in the study of the electrical condition of th 
atmosphere, and the studies carried out by Davies were th 
first ever made on the Pacific ocean or in the polar regioas 
With Dr. Coman, he measured the cooling power of the ai 
under varying conditions of temperature and wind velocity 
and as assistant to Dr. Gould he made a study of glacio 
logical conditions at Little America, particularly with respec 
to the measurements of temperature gradients, density deter 
minations and the effects of different temperature periods l 
the growth of crystals. | 
Our Welsh magnetician therefore was one of the busies 
men in Little America. With a carefree impunity we had t 
admire, he scrambled in and out of some of the wors' 
crevasses about the camp, during the winter, risking life anc 
limb for the sake of getting a few temperature readings a 


1 


j 

ing depths, a cluster of ice crystals or a specimen of ice. 
The Radio Department, which was under the direction 
Mr. Malcolm Hanson, was one of the most effective and 
ortant activities of the expedition. Few men worked 
der than Hanson, Petersen and Mason; and none did more 
smooth its way. Much of the equipment necessary for 
munication had not been developed to a point where it 
‚ commercially available when the expedition left the 
ited States, and a considerable part of it had to be espe- 
ly designed and constructed for conditions in the Antarctic. 
e radio receivers carried in the three planes, for example, 
re literally built from the bottom up by Mr. Hanson and 
staff, after preliminary flights in the United States. How 
portant and intricate was the communications problem of 
expedition may be judged from the fact that 24 trans- 
ters and 31 receivers were used. There was sufficient 
yptepe to supply the two ships, the main base, three air- 
nes, three dog team parties and two sub-bases. Of this 
arge part was redesigned and rebuilt during the winter. 

As with the other phases of our multiple activities, radio 
3 studied exhaustively. Constant and effective communica- 
n was essential to Little America, to the flight activities 
d to the trail parties. There were frequent conferences 
ring the winter at which the details of all equipment were 
key out. The measure of the thoroughness with which 
anson, Petersen and Mason worked lies in the fact that 
t once did their equipment fail us. 

' The emergency equipment developed for the planes was 
perb. The three planes were capable of operating on both 
gh and intermediate frequencies, and therefore were 
rtually immune to all but excessive radio disturbances. In 
dition each plane was equipped with an emergency set, for 
© in case of a forced landing. There were also provided 
radio compass and a directive radio transmitting beacon, 
th of which were effective, within certain limits, as a means 
` navigating the planes in the event of sudden fog or bliz- 
ga shutting down visibility while in flight. By means of 
e first, which would cooperate with intermediate frequency 
enals from the plane, a bearing could be transmitted to the 
lane from the base to indicate the proper steering direction. 


MORE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 267 


268 LITTLE AMERICA 


The second sent out a distinct type of signal exactly to the 
north, south, east or west; and by following this path the 
radio man or the pilot on the flight could guide the plane 
back to the base. This type of beacon, which is called the 
crossed-coil, equi-signal beacon, has since been developed to 
a high state of perfection by the Army and the Department 
of Commerce and is now used extensively on commercial 
airways. But when we went south it was still largely experi- 
mental. 

The same care and thoroughness went into the develop- 
ment of the radio equipment of the southern sledge parties. The 
problem here was a peculiar one, and yet not radically different 
from others that faced us. The equipment had to be sturdy 
enough to withstand the pounding of sledging, and yet light in 
weight. It had to be simple to operate, because most of the men 
who were to use it were comparatively inexperienced. The 
sets were built and redesigned during the winter, and use 
was to prove how shrewdly. At the same time, the men 
developed de Ganahl and Crockett into fairly good operators 
for the Geological and the Supporting Parties. Both Smith 
and June took an active part, when time allowed, in radio 
activities. 

Apart from its practical assistance, which’ was immeasur- 
able, the radio department conducted an unbroken series of 
research investigations of radio conditions in the Antarctic. 
With Davies, Hanson made a study of the relations between 
radio and magnetic conditions. He also made a study of the 
Kennelly-Heaviside Layer, a mysterious phenomenon which is 
described as a radio roof which surrounds the earth and is 
essential for all long-distance, short-wave communication. It 
is presumed to consist of electric charges or ions liberated by 
the sun’s radiations in the upper levels of the atmosphere, where 
the air pressure is negligible. The position of the lower limit 
of the layer apparently varies according to the height of the 
vup, and hence upon the time of the day, the time of the year 
and geographical position. As an electrical conductor it has the 
property of reflecting, by progressive refraction, the radio 
waves which reach it from the earth, thus sending them back 
to a useful path, rather than permitting them to escape and 
become lost in space. For years this phenomenon had been 


MORE PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 269 


studied by engineers, and a number of conflicting theories pre- 
vailed as to its nature and extent in the Antarctic, particularly 
with regards to the effects of the prolonged absence of the sun 
during the winter months and the proximity of the magnetic 
Pole. 

Hanson developed a method of measuring the height and 
condition of the Heaviside Layer at various seasons, and he 
took to great pains to test it. During the coldest weather 
in July, when the temperature was close to 70° below zero, 
he, Vaughan and de Ganahl made several sledge trips ten 
miles out on the Barrier, to send groups of electrically timed, 
brief radio impulses to Petersen. The first time they were 
ready to start, the dogs froze their noses and paws, and the 
trip had to be postponed. Later Hanson went out with de 
Ganahl, Crockett and Bursey, and the four of them man- 
hauled a sledge for five miles, in a temperature of 68° below 
zero. They planted flags every 100 yards to guide them 
through the darkness. When they pitched camp, it was so 
cold taking measurements that Hanson, who was sitting on 
a box, put a primus stove behind his legs, covered it with 
his parka and became his own furnace. But in the end he 
got the measurements he wanted. 

The most fascinating place of all, however, was the main 
station in the Mess Hall, WFA. Hege Petersen and Mason 
eavesdropped on the world. They chatted with the Graf 
Zeppelin on its flight around the world. They talked with 
the Russian Polar Expedition at Franz Joseph Land. They 
communicated with the University of Michigan’s station at 
Greenland. An enormous amount of traffic flowed between 
them and the experts under Fred Meinholtz, who is the chief 
of the radio department of the New York Times. The han- 
dling of this traffic—in all, 2,000,000 words were transmitted 
from WFA—was possible only through the exercise of 
patience and resourcefulness. Time and time again, when 
important messages were awaiting delivery, the ether resisted 
the impulses, and Mason and Petersen spent hours in pains- 
taking experiment, shifting from one frequency to another, 
until they found a “break” that would let them through. I 
think these men took particular pride in overcoming difficulties 
when they were at their worst. There were very few days 


270 LITTLE AMERICA 


when they were not able to maintain their regular two-w 
schedules with New York and the ships at New Zealand. 

No picture of She expedition’s operation during the wir 
would be complete without mention of the ships’ party 
Dunedin. Their job was a hard job, for waiting is alwi 
hard on energetic men. Nevertheless the crews under Cap& 
Brown and Captain Melville never lost their sturdy indepen 
ence and patience. For the expedition’s treasury was runni 
low, Commissary Officer Reichart was obliged to prune 4 
penses to the bone, and the men lived under fairly straiten 
circumstances. Yet most of them asked for no more mon 
than was absolutely necessary to support them and their fan 
lies. Taylor, for example, took his dogs to Mt. Cook and us 
them as transport, causing them to earn part of their expens 

Nor would it be complete without mention also of our № 
Zealand representative, Mr. Tapley, and his general manag 
Mr. Duncan. No members of the expedition worked hard 
than they; and I confess frankly that without their efficie 
and delightful cooperation we might have found our task 1 
possibly hard. The Dominion of New Zealand, from t 
Prime Minister down, was always kind and helpful; but t 
Tapleys and Mr. Duncan were generous to a fault. 


CHAPTER XII 


THE START OF THE SOUTHERN PARTIES 


il. during August, save when the sky was overcast, a 
Chy enlarging shimmer of gold and red burned and waned 
he northern horizon. The hours of darkness grew shorter. 
img was in the air—but not the kind of spring of which 
fs sing in more temperate climes. From the 16th to the 
raged a severe blizzard, turning the outside world into 
os. When it ceased, the temperature began to fall steadily. 
the 19th the Antarctic equivalent of the robin—or shall we 
the ground-hog?—a timorous Weddell seal—poked a 
wn head out of the thin ice over a blow hole, took one 
ith of the frigid air, and hastily drew it in again. He 
y back none too soon, for a man hungry for the taste of 
h meat pounced at him with a pole. 
On the 20 the radiance in the north grew and splashed 
Barrier with a gold and yellow effulgence. The return of 
sun was nigh. A few of us stole a march on it by climbing 
radio towers, thus gaining a pre-view of its long-antici- 
d return. It was cold up there, and Rucker apa Van der 
g suffered tortures to carry their heavy camera to She top for 
sake of a novel “shot.” The sun was a gorgeous sight from 
precarious perch, half a hemisphere of warm splendor sus- 
led beneath a strand of coral clouds. In the south a 
u3 that was green cheese was set, wan, pale and ethereal, in 
porous purple firmament. 
That day Braathen and Bursey killed a seal on the bay ice, 
ve had fresh steak for supper. Balchen and Strom put on 
g skis and journeyed to Framheim, to report on the condi- 
of the crevasses through which the Southern parties must 
c. They returned over the bay ice, and saw that many 
271 


272 LITTLE AMERICA 


changes had taken place. New upheavals had lifted new pres- 
sure ridges, deep crevasses had been formed and were partly 
drifted over and the surface was badly torn and broken. 
Winter had torn the place to pieces as if it was so much scrap 
paper. 

We began to dig out now, with a vengeance. 

Thursday, August 22d, the sun returned officially. A 
yellow immensity, distorted by refraction, it peeped over the 
horizon, past a gossamer veil of clouds, awakened the slumber- 
ing colors in the Barrier cliffs, rolled along the horizon a while 
and then, its job done, sank in a marvellous sunset. There was 
the same rush for grandstand seats on the radio towers, but 
not even the most devoted admirer of Apollo cared to remain 
long in his perch. The temperature was 40° below. Dean 
Smith dropped a glove, in his hurry to ascend, and though he 
came down like a circus acrobat he was not fast enough to 
escape a nasty frost bite. His hand was burned and seared 
when he grasped the iron. 

The sun’s return was celebrated appropriately. 

The American flag was raised, to signal its return, and 
was left flying until the base was abandoned. Then Ronne, 
representing the Norwegians, and Davies, the British, raised 
the flags of their countries, in a ceremony which had for its 
purpose the honoring of the achievements of the British and 
Norwegians in the Antarctic. 

A Victrola played the bugle call to arms, and all uncovered. 
The wind was blowing and it was chilly. 

That night we celebrated joyfully. As the sun’s return 
coincided with Dr. Gould’s birthday, the two celebrations 
were merged. The best and worst features of each were pre- 
served. Although I dare say it would be interesting, a de- 
scription of the affair has no place in this volume: I can only 
submit the report which the meteorological department in- 
cluded in its monthly paper: “A mild tornado struck the mess 
hall on the night of August 22nd-23rd and left a trail of 
wreckage in its wake.” 

The sun rose a little higher every day, remained up a little 
longer, and slowly advanced his rise to the east. Spring was 
in its flowering, but it was a chilly spring. Snow covered the 
camp, and only the chimney pipes and the radio towers stood 


unf poten puv “pochopeya 3uleya ‘P144 topueshshood “late "M Choy quus ‘9 ueəaq—: 44514 02 427 


“AUVUAIT AHL NI ChOMYaChChYaMOG) NI SLOG NOILVIAV ChHI, 


‘NOS FHL 10 myp 


START OF THE SOUTHERN PARTIES 273 ya 


above the surface. In fact the weight of the snow op She 
houses was so great that the roofs of two of them were sag- 
ging. We began to dig out, timidly, lest a walloping snow 
storm nullify the work of the shovel squad. 

August went out with a temperature reading 66° below 
zero and September came in with the same impressive low. 
September was the second coldest month of all. It was the one 
month during our sojourn in the Antarctic during which the 
temperature did not once rise above zero. The highest reading 
was 2° below on the 18th, the next highest was 11° below, on 
the 17th; for the most part, it fluctuated between 30° and 60° 
below. The mean temperature for the month was 44° below. 
September ended on the frosty low of 63° below, and we bade 
it farewell with shivering gladness. 

Some of the men now began to suffer. Owing to extrava- 
gant use, the supply of cigarettes was nearly exhausted. The 
ery of pain that went up when Supply Officer Black announced 
the crisis must have been heard by the tobacco workers in 
Virginia. There was no recourse save to roll our own, with 
poor paper and pipe tobacco, which we did painfully and badly. 
Cigars were already more precious than—as a matter of fact, 
the cigar, at that period of Antarctic civilization, allowed of 
no comparison; it stood for absolute luxury and opulence. 
The man who owned a few was spoken to with deference by 
the rest, and the aroma that escaped from him was a tantaliz- 
ing rebuke to the others who had not been so frugal. Our 
Times correspondent, with a self-denial which no one sus- 
pected in him, had carefully budgeted his supply and so had 
enough to eke out the winter. There were several others, too, 
who had put aside a few boxes of cigarettes and cigars against 
absolute need; and it was astonishing how they were brought 
forth on special occasions. “Have a smoke,” some one would 
say, and lo! he would offer a real cigarette. Henry Harrison 
told me that the most precious gift he ever received was when 
good old Ronne gave him a box of cigarettes. 

The month raced past, for all the cold, on the wings of 
expectancy. We were eager, all of us, to be off on our vari- 
ous missions: the Supporting Party to its depots, the Geo- 
logical Party to the Mountains, the Polar F light Group to the 


Pole. 


or es 3dpav. 


274 LITTLE AMERICA 


Monday 
September 9 


Shovels to the fore again. 

Today the Aviation Unit began to dig out the Fairchild. 
Just a mass of snow marks its hangar. Haines tells me that 
93.8 inches of snow have fallen since the first of the year, 
according to his calculations. Of course much of this has 
been lost through ablation. The surface about the mounds, 
however, seems to have been built up at least five feet higher 
than before. There is a most marvellous streamlining of snow 
about every raised place. 


W ednesday 
September 11 


The houses are as busy as factories. The southern parties 
are making final preparations for the trail. Every one is at 
work at something—sewing parkas and socks, repairing har- 
ness, testing tents, relashing sledges. 

The quietest place in camp is Braathen’s House, and Owen, 
seeking quiet for his literary productions, has fled there for 
sanctuary. Á 

More seals have been seen in the bay, big, fat fellows. 

Temperature today 68° below. Can spring be far behind? 


Tuesday 
September 17 


The shovellers have burrowed into the Fairchild hangar. 
The plane has come through the winter better than I had dared 
hope. No snow was found in the cabin—just a trace of ice 
crystals. The mechanics are getting ready to take down the 
engine. If the weather is good, we ought to have both planes 
in the air early in November. 

After a week of dazzlingly clear atmosphere, the sky 
clouded and remains generally overcast. Today, there is a 
ten-knot wind, and with the temperature down to 43° below it 


has an edge like a razor blade. There were a number of frost 
bites today, none serious. 


2 


START OF THE SOUTHERN PARTIES | yc? 


Friday + 
Sept. 20th 


We have had a wild time with the dogs. They are so over- 
joyed to be above ground once more that they have forgotten 
all manners and training, and run about the camp like lunatics. 

It is simply impossible to get them into harness. After a 
patient hour’s work to get his team in line, Crockett finally 
gave up an unruly pair and started off with six dogs. Instant- 
ly they dashed around in a mad circle, slamming the sledge 
around as if it weighed nothing at all, while Freddy yelled 
and cursed and tried to hold on to the careening sledge. In the 
midst of these revolutions, the dogs suddenly sighted the en- 
trance to their tunnel, and with impish perversity raced right 
down, carrying sledge, Crockett and all. It was a frightful 
tangle. 

Bursey and Vaughan had no better luck. Vaughan’s big 
black leader, Dinty, from whom we had been led to expect 
things, was as wild as a stallion, and sooner than it takes to 
tell it his sledge was upside down in the snow and everything 
a noisy confusion. Braathen’s team made a racing swing about 
the camp, but came to grief when the dogs ran head-on into 
one of the guy wires supporting the radio towers. The impact 
cut the harnesses, and poor Braathen had to chase two of the 
dogs down into the Ver-sur-Mer. It is a wonder they did 
not break their necks. 

I wish we had more dogs. The dogs that Taylor has at 
Mt. Cook would certainly come in handy now. Beyond a 
doubt we shall have to train some of the wild pups that have 
been running about the camp. It will be hard enough to catch 
them, let alone train them. They are wilder and fleeter than 
March hares. Their size and strength speak well for their 
future usefulness. Actually, they appear to be in better condi- 
tion than the dogs that were pampered throughout the winter. 


W ednesday 
September 25 


We put the new airplane sledge that Balchen and Strom 
made on the scales this morning and found it weighed only 
20% pounds, It is a beauty. This is to be our transport in 


+ 276 LITTLE AMERICA 


case of a forced landing on the polar flight. I have decided to 
take it on my daily walks to practice man-hauling. 

The chimney in the administration building, which lasted 
through all the worst storms of the winter, collapsed in a 15- 
knot wind, and fell through its hole, choking the place with 
soot. We had a devil of a job getting it back—the tempera- 
ture was 50° below, and many hands were nipped before it 
was done. Our quarters are filled with greasy soot. It will 
be days before we can scrape things clean. 


Thursday 
Sept. 26th 


Still driving ahead on preparations for the southern 
journeys. 

Thorne put on skis today and made a trip to the old Bar- 
rier cache. In spite of the heavy fall of snow, the trail still 
visible, although only a furrow in the surface, and most of the 
flags were still up. 

Siple and Bursey have just returned from a trip to East 
Cape by dog team. 


Saturday 
September 28 


Temp. 60° below at its lowest today. 

Our dog power is dwindling much too fast. Spee, one of 
the best dogs in Goodale’s team, was killed in a fight last 
night. The team was staked outside, and apparently he broke 
loose from the gang line. A few days ago one of Bursey’s 
dogs was so badly chewed up in a scuffle that he cannot be 
used on the southern trip. 

The dog men must take greater precautions. It is a 
deucedly hard thing to chain the dogs down, but it can and 
must be done. We shall be hard-pressed for dogs if any 
rescue efforts are necessary. Gould has already proposed to 
borrow the two pups, Sky and Ski, which Parker and McKin- 
ley have adopted. If he values his life, he had better bring 
them back. McKinley and Parker will put up a real protest 
when this plan is suggested. 

I have decided to radio Taylor to board one of the whalers 
with his dogs. The Kosmos is leaving New Zealand early, 


START OF THE SOUTHERN PARTIES | 


and it is possible that they can relay him and the dogs to the 
base on a chaser. We shall need dogs badly very soon. 


Monday 
September 30 

After four days of clear, bristling cold weather, another 
blizzard is on us. The temperature was 63° below this morn- 
ing, but is rising steadily. It is now 17° below. 

Although they cannot possibly reach here before the end 
of December, we are looking forward to a return of the ships. 
The men are betting on the day of their arrival; and the larg- 
est prizes that are being offered in the camp are the privileges 
of eating, if the victor, the biggest dinner that the Grand 
Hotel at Dunedin offers. 

We are praying that the ice in the Bay will go out farther 
than it did last year. Conditions are certainly more promising. 
Although the edge of the new ice is now between 15 and 20 
miles north of us and stretches solidly across north of West 
Cape, it is badly torn and rafted by pressure, and should go 
out faster. 

The Ross Sea is apparently open far to the north. Dur- 
ing the clear spells we constantly saw a dark water sky. 

We had another fog today—a light, impalpable mist which 
greatly reduced visibility. 


Tuesday 
Oc. 

Working days are here again. 

Breakfast has been advanced to 7:30, and all hands begin 
work at 8:15 o’clock, “ob” at noon, and supper at 5 o'clock. 
This gives us a long working day. 

We have weighed all the various types of sledges, with 
the following results: 


Airplane sledge made by Strom and Balchen 2016 Ibs. 
Ski sledges without braces 18Y% $ 
Long Norwegian freight sledge 5I x 
No. t Strom- Balchen freight sledge 60 j 
No. 2 + 60 E 
No. 1 Norwegian Army sledge moe 
Ko. 2 M DI u 
Walden freight sledge, with wooden runners sade 


Walden basket sledge, with combination runners bo 


$ 278 LITTLE AMERICA 


Black has been busy weighing the final list of material that 
will be carried on the base-laying and polar flights. The sum 
total of listed material is about 15,000 pounds, including gaso- 
line and the weight of the plane. We have reduced emergency 
equipment, which includes sledge, food and clothing, to ap- 
proximately 1,400 Ibs. I think that we can still further re- 
duce these weights. 


Friday 
October 4th 


Siple and Bursey have made another long trip by dog team 
on the bay ice to the north, rounding West Cape and pro- 
ceeding some distance in the direction of Discovery Bay. The 
Bay of Whales is frozen much more extensively than we had 
believed. They did not encounter open water until 20 miles 
out. The sea smoke was then so dense they could not see 
any great distance. They sledged over new green ice which 
had been blown free of drift and was smooth enough, ac- · 
cording to Siple, for skating. They also sighted a number of 
small whales, the first seen this spring. 


Saturday 
October 5th 


More signs of spring. 

Strom saw a baby seal, a scrawny, gray-brown Weddell 
seal, on the ice, and the traces about it and the mother in- 
dicated the pup was born yesterday. 

Also a flight of Antarctic petrels was seen, flying high. 

The wild pups, which, by the way, are nearly as big as 
their parents, have been down to the Bay, looking over the 
seals. They were overwhelmed by curiosity, but the boldest 
of them dared not approach within 20 yards. They will 
learn rashness soon enough. 


Sunday 
October 6th 


Blackburn, Bursey and Siple have been given the job of 
rounding up all stray pups and breaking them to harness. 
They will have their hands full. 

The Aviation Unit has been hard at work with snow shovels 
about the Fairchild, and should have it on the surface within a 


START OF THE SOUTHERN PARTIES 279 


couple of days. The mechanics have been wonderful. Day 
after day, they have worked in temperatures that rarely got 
higher than 20° above zero. 

Overcast and cold, 42° below. 


The Supporting Party will be ready to start in eight days. 


_ Monday, March 7th, the Fairchild, its motor oiled, greased 
and checked, came out of its snow hangar and resumed its old 
` place on the surface. Its folded wings were swung into posi- 
tion, and the plane was secured firmly by ice anchors. Instru- 
ments, engine and structure had come through the winter with- 
out harm. We then turned our energies toward liberating the 
Ford, a back-rending effort. On the same day, McKinley took 
over the responsibility of the administration of the camp, in 
order that Dr. Gould might be able to devote his whole time 
to the trail parties, which were nearly ready for the start. 

From the 7th of October to the 9th, we had a spell of 
fairly warm weather, the thermometer registering as high as 
3° below; but even had the teams been ready, I was reluctant to 
start them early, as it was suggested, for fear they would en- 
counter low enough temperatures on the Barrier to turn them 
back. 

` Dogs quickly lose their vitality in excessive cold, and the 

friction of the sand-like snow adds greatly to the weight of 
the load. As it was, the wind veered from the east to the south 
on the 9th, and the thermometer tumbled to 47° below zero 
op She roth. E 

After days of a diffused, gray nothing which passed as 
daylight, in which the world about us took on an unreal and 
ghostly aspect, oddly lacking in shadows, the sun put on a 
gorgeous show. The meteorologists, in their terse way, said: 
“a brilliant, complex halo phenomena occurred on She oth and 
the 18th,” and let it go at that. When the wind shifted to the 
south, the canopy of clouds overhead was rent into feathery 
fragments and sent scudding more or less to the west. The 
air suddenly became charged with ice crystals, which fell like 
rain. The sun broke through the shattered cloud fabric which 
turned yellow and opalescent in its growing power, then an arch 
more beautiful than any rainbow I have ever seen swept up- 
ward, curved, and in a moment the sun was crossed by two 


280 LITTLE AMERICA 


great shafts of brilliant light, in the center of which it burned 
with leaping tongues of flame. On either side could be seen 
the trembling halos of the mock suns, each impaled on its shaft 
of prismatic light. Directly opposite the sun was the anthelion, 
the reflection of the outstretched reach of the cross, a luminous 
gray pillar rising from the snows of the Barrier. 

For nearly an hour we watched this gorgeous display, while 
the ice crystals that caused it fell in sparkling showers. But - 
as the temperature slid down, and the moisture in the air 
condensed more rapidly, the fall of crystals became thicker and 
slowly hid the sun. The gray impalpability again took pos- 
session of the scene. And a3 Owen wrote that night: “we went 
indoors deeply affected by the beauty and grandeur of this 
great vision.” 

On the oth we also inaugurated Daylight Saving Time (we 
began to operate on 180th Meridian Time which is about an 
hour earlier than our time. At this meridian we could use 
today’s date or tomorrow’s as we wished). A group of men 
filled the hole from which the Fairchild emerged so as to 
eliminate the danger of the planes falling through while taxi- 
ing about the camp. Considerable progress was meanwhile 
made in digging out the Ford. While this work went on, 
Balchen, Bubier, June, Demas and Roth worked in the chamber 
in which the nose lay, checking the motors and examing the 
center section. The first investigation showed that it, too, 
had come through the winter unscathed; its duralumin struc- 
ture had endured the low temperatures without so much as a | 
crack. Our hangar was an exceptionally good one. Niches 
had been cut in the walls of snow and it was possible to work 
directly on the engines and center sections. Handling metal 
parts at 25° below, with bare hands, was like handling a red 
hot stove lid. 

Last minute preparations for the departure of the Sup- 
porting Party were in full swing. Weather permitting, it was 
proposed that they should begin their departure next day, 
October roth. It was decided, ip a conference with Dr. Gould, 
that the Geological Party should accompany them for several 
days, in order that the men might not only orient themselves 
to rigor of the trail, and test out the equipment but also to 
advance the heavy loads 50 or 75 miles to the south. 


START OF THE SOUTHERN PARTIES 281 


Thursday, the roth, was overcast, with a to-shye wind from 
the southwest spreading a draught of cold air from the hinter- 

lands. The temperature fell from 30° to 47° below. The 
departure of the teams was, therefore, postponed. In a sense, 
the delay was fortunate, because Gould was suddenly stricken 
with indigestion, and although he insisted upon making the 
trip if conditions were favorable he could not have done so 
without great suffering. 

Friday, the wind was still from the southwest, blowing 
nearly 18 miles per hour, and the temperature was still at 47°. 
Again the start was deferred. 

Saturday, the r2th, the wind shifted to east, rose to a 
velocity of 30 miles per hour, and drove a first-class blizzard 
over the camp. When T ventured out in the smother for my 
daily walk, conditions were so grievous that I could not 
but be glad that the boys had at least escaped this storm so 
early in the journey. With the blizzard, the temperature rose 
from 42° to 12° below, but when the sky cleared it immediately 
began to go down again, quite as fast as it had risen. 

Sunday, the 13th, was cold and clear, with light variable 
winds, and a temperature of 34° below. 

By this time, the men in the Supporting Party were con- 
vinced that spring would never come; they besieged Haines for 
predictions, spent half the time running out-of-doors to see 
whether or not the weather would repudiate his gloomy words, 
and the rest making final alterations in their loads. There is 
one thing about sledging one should always bear in mind: the 
best plan can always be improved and the task of preparing 
for it is never really done. 

Some of us had meanwhile gone over the plans again, 
and come to the conclusion that the Supporting Party could 
take advantage of this bad weather, in a measure, by hauling 
part of their loads over the bay ice and depositing it on the 
Barrier slope. The bay ice to the south was wickedly broken 
up, travelling over it with heavily loaded sledges would be 
more difficult than they anticipated, and we recommended 
that they have done with it now, while there was still time 
for leisurely transport. We further recommended the trip as 
a test journey and invested the drivers with the responsibility 
of making the decision on the theory that, as the responsibility 


282 LITTLE AMERICA 


for the success of the whole trip rested with them, they should 
control it from the beginning. Although one or two men 
dissented, the rest Were in favor of the plan. 

At 12:30 p.m. o'clock, five teams, driven by Walden, 
Vaughan, Goodale, Thorne and Bursey, were ready to start. 
They carried a total load of 4,000 pounds. Each team carried 
two sledges, one of them empty. The loaded sledge was to be 
left on the Barrier and picked up at the start of the southern · 
journey. In the party with me were Van der Veer and Rucker, 
Parker and Owen. 

The sledges were off to a flying start, the dogs tearing 
down the slope to Ver-sur-Mer inlet in an ecstasy of energy. 
Chunks of snow flew back in our faces, the wind was more 
than chilly and our heavy clothes did not offer any too much 
warmth. The sledges struck the bay ice with a great show of 
speed, and we veered around the southern portal with such im- 
petuosity that I thought, for a moment, the drivers proposed 
to sheer it off, merely to show how little they cared for such 
obstructions. Beyond the mouth of the inlet a mighty pres- 
sure ridge, towering and distorted, reared its serrated eminence 
directly across our path and bore due south for about a mile. 
The teams turned some distance this side of it, and ran 
parallel to it, between it and the walls of the Barrier. The bay 
ice was littered with crystals, and the runners scattered them 
by the thousands. 

When the sledges rounded the southern terminus of the 
ridge, another ridge was found just behind it. "HI, hi, hi, hi, 
hi,” yelled the drivers, cracking their whips, and we crested it 
with a surging drive that carried us down the other side at 
a velocity which was somewhat faster than I had anticipated. 
However, this raking charge soon spent its force halfway up 
another incline, and the teams, one after another, slowed 
down as the dogs dug in for the last, belly-scraping pull. 

The trail bore slightly to the west. A short distance on 
we came to still another pressure ridge, somewhat more com- 
plicated than the others, being split into two more or less dis- 
tinct fractures. Through the first we discovered a fairly 
comfortable passage, but the second, which we penetrated 
through a narrow corridor barely large enough to admit a 
single sledge, sloped sharply down into a gully which was 


START OF THE SOUTHERN PARTIES 283 


packed with loose snow. Here every sledge ground to a 
halt in a smother of snow. Dogs and men threw in their 
strength together, and it took all we had to stir the heavily 
loaded sledges. More than once I was of the Opinion we 
could go no farther. 

Thanks to the perseverance of the men and to the dogged 
persistence of the dogs, we got free at last. Then the surface 
of the ice changed, giving way to rolling waves of ice, re- 
sembling furrows, which were caused by pressure. The sledges 
bumped over these, booming hollowly over the ice, approach- 
ing still another ridge, of an aspect wilder than the rest. As we 
could not take this one by assault, we hauled out snow shovels 
and fell to the task of breaching it. In spite of the low tem- 
perature, shoveling was hot work and we soon were perspir- 
ing. At length the men made a sizable embrasure, sufficient 
to admit the sledges. On the other side fragments of old ice 
had been lifted high above its former level by immense pres- 
sure, huge blocks had been up-ended and ice boulders were 
strewn over the surface. The boys pushed, pulled and hauled 
the sledges through the break, and after an hour’s hard work 
had moved them all to the other side. A few miles to the 
south, the Barrier rolled higher and higher, its surface flecked 
with dancing spots of color, and long, mysterious shadows, 
suggestive of land which, we knew, was not there, played 
over it. 

The last stretch of bay ice was badly torn, and we made 
our way over it with difficulty. The Barrier, in the vicinity 
where we prepared to ascend it, rose in a series of tilted ter- 
races. The first of these was approached by a fairly steep in- 
cline, which was surmounted by a jagged ridge. Heaving 
and shoving, while the dogs pulled until their red tongues 
drooped like flags, we hoisted the sledges to the rim of 
the ridge. The stretch beyond was unpromising. A series 
of crevasses, some of them open and showing their blue 
side, others bridged by snow, lay in our path. Treachery and 
grief lay in that tangled waste, and we studied it with re- 
spect. 

In the center of this disturbance we spotted one of the 
flags which had been put up last year, to mark the trail to the 
first depots. Otherwise this part of the trail was obliterated, 


284 LITTLE AMERICA 


and it behooved us to move with caution. Walden’s practiced 
eye, however, made out a likely path, and we decided to essay 
it. We had great difficulty in starting the sledges, for the 
tractive effort necessary to move them through loosely packed 
snow, which was like grit at this low temperature, was much 
greater than required on the smooth ice. Time and time 
again, we sank almost to the armpits when the crust suddenly 
let us through. There was always the unpleasant possibility 
that a shallow bridge might admit us altogether. 

Descending the farther side of the ridge, we came to a 
deep, but narrow crevasse, which investigation showed was 
thinly bridged at the point where we proposed to cross it. 
Under ordinary circumstances, I confess, I should not care to 
try to rush a sledge across it; but these were not ordinary 
circumstances. Walden was of the opinion the sledges were 
long enough, however, to distribute the load without greater 
danger, and we trusted on momentum to lessen the strain. 

The first sledge cleared the crevasse in a flurry of snow— 
but none too quickly, at that. As the front end rose slightly on 
the distant side, the rear runners dipped down and broke a 
hole through. One by one, three other sledges made the rush 
without mishap. Walden, who brought up the rear guard, 
had the heaviest sledge of all. Just as he cleared the edge, the 
sledge veered violently and tipped over, pinning him under- 
neath. He fell on the brink of a drop into a second crevasse, 
saving himself by clutching hold of the sledge. Without a 
word, he scrambled clear, righted the sledge, started the dogs 
and resumed his steady trot. 

A short distance on we decided to drop the loaded sledges, 
and return to camp. We had moved the loads only seven miles, 
and it had taken us four hours. We came back on the empty 
sledges, making excellent time. But that slight journey left 
on my mind an indelible impression. Whatever confidence the 
men on the southern parties might have, the fact remained they 
carried fearfully heavy loads; and no matter how optimistic 
they were, they would find the going very hard indeed, especi- 
ally with maximum loads at the beginning. I had observed 
enough to come to the conclusion that, unless the cold 
abated, they would quickly dissipate all their strength during 
the first stages of the journey. On my return to camp, I 


START OF THE SOUTHERN PARTIES 285 


had a conference with Dr. Gould, and it was decided the parties 
would not start until the temperature was not lower than 20° 
below, at which the snow would offer a better sledging sur- 
face. 

That night we nursed a generous collection of frost bites 
on the hands and face which were the result of fast traveling 
with empty sledges on the way back. 


Monday 
October r4th 

Dog teams still in camp. 

Temperature was 47° below early this morning, but rose to 
21° below. Now it is falling again. 

The drivers are impatient to start, but realize this is not the 
time. 

Meanwhile, the camp is beginning to emerge from its 
winter blanket. The Aviation Unit has retrieved the Ford 
wing sections from the hole in which they lay and the men 
have just finished bolting it into position. 

Feury and Black are now digging out the snowmobile, 
and hope to have it in action within a day or two. We in- 
tend to send it out on the southern train, on the chance it may 
be of some assistance in moving supplies from one depot to 
another. If it proves equal to the Barrier surface, it should 
help the sledge parties immensely. 

There is the greatest rivalry between the crew of the snow- 
mobile and the dog men. Feury and Blackie are boasting 
that they will take the snowmobile straight through to the 
Pole, if the road isn’t cluttered up by slow-moving dog teams. 
They are contending with conditions which will test their 
ingenuity and strength. Frankly, I doubt very much whether 
the Ford can make much progress in soft snow. However, 
it is worth a try, anyway. I like their spirit. 


Tuesday 
October 15th 


Both parties started south today. 
In the Supporting Party were: Walden, de Ganahl, Bursey 


and Braathen. Petersen went along to test the radio equipment 
on the trail and will return with the Geological Party. 
Four teams of the Geological Party accompanied them— 


\ 


286 LITTLE AMERICA 


Thorne, Vaughan, Goodale and O’Brien. Dr. Gould is in 
charge. It is planned that the Geological Party will return in 
two or three days. Each team carries the full southern load, 
and the trip should give the men just the seasoning and the 
experience they need. 

The weather was splendid for the start: Temperature, 10° 
below, sky only slightly overcast, and a light wind from the 
northeast. The sledges moved very easily over the bay ice, 
and within two hours after the start (which was made at 
12:15 P.M. o'clock) the first of them reached the sledges which 
had been left on the Barrier two days before. 

I accompanied them on a sledge driven by Siple, and he gave 
me what I would conservatively describe as the wildest ride I 
have ever had. The team was made up of a number of the wild 
pups which had been broken, none too well, to harness, with 
Holly as lead. Most of the drivers were of the opinion that 
the pups were not capable of pulling more than four or five 
miles at a time, but Siple assured me they were wrong. We 
started down the inlet as if going to a fire. 

Our troubles began. We had twice as many pups as were 
needed. The traces tangled, the sledge overturned and, worst 
of all, Holly stubbornly refused to stand still while we tried to 
straighten out the lines. In desperation, we fastened the dogs 
down with crow bars and snow shovels until we got things 
straight. | 

We had not gone far when the pups tangled the lines again. 
As I started to get off the sledge, Holly lurched forward, spill- 
ing snow shovels, crow bars and me on the ice, and the team 
went off with bullet-like speed. It travelled nearly half a mile 
before Siple could bring it to a halt, and by that time I was 
marching southward with half a dozen crow bars and snow 
shovels under my arms. I was fond of Holly but she was 
mightily in wrong for the moment. 

After this, however, the pups were on their good behavior 
and showed a surprising amount of speed over the last stretch ; 
their strength was prodigious. They easily passed some of the 
bigger teams and carried us up the Barrier well ahead of the 
rest. 

The loaded sledges were coupled on to the other sledges in 
jig-time, and we all shook hands. I merely told them: “You 


START OF THE SOUTHERN PARTIES 287 


can do it if any men can. Every man in camp is back of you 
with everything we have. The only thing I ask you to re- 
member is that the life of any man is worth more than any- 
thing we can accomplish. That comes first. Good luck, take 
the necessary precautions and you will come back O.K. Now 
go to it.” | 

Bursey was in the lead, and behind him were de Ganahl, 
Braathen, Walden and Petersen. The teams of the Geological 
Party were strung out behind. 

For quite a long time we watched the line moving up the 
slope, disappearing behind one ridge and reappearing on the 
crest of another. Presently the figures grew smaller, the calls 
fainter, and we lost sight of them altogether. 

Their spirit and good cheer were all that could be expected 
and more. Their spirit will not break—that I know. But 
what their good cheer will be in a few hours may be another 
story. 

When we turned back to the sledges, we discovered that the 
exasperating pups had chewed their harness to pieces and were 
running wild. I left Siple and Dr. Coman to the job of round- 
ing them up, and returned on Goodale’s sledge. 

Matters are moving according to schedule. The Ford en- 
gines are being checked, fuel lines renewed and the ship other- 
wise made ready for the polar flight. 

If luck is with us, we shall be off on the base-laying flight 
within three weeks. 


My concern was realized. Soon after we left them, the 
southern parties became bogged in deep drifts and the heavy 
loads were almost more than they could bear. The men stripped 
off outer clothing, made loops in the lines and harnessed them- 
selves to the sledges, adding their efforts to those of the dogs. 
In spite of this, the sledges came to a stop every few hundred 
yards, while dogs and men rested to renew their strength. 
They radioed that night they were in camp just beyond the 
crevasses, 11.8 miles from Little America, having made only 
four miles in three hours. 

Wednesday, the 16th, they reached 20 Mile Depot after 
the hardest kind of pulling. Both parties were in trouble. 
Dr. Gould had concluded, when they reached camp, that 


288 LITTLE AMERICA 


it would be impossible for his party to continue farther until 
the loads were reorganized, and Walden, in command of the 
Supporting Party, had decided to jettison every scrap of 
clothing which could be spared. It was decided that the 
Geological Party should turn back, and that Petersen should 
accompany them. This would lighten the loads of the sup- 
porting Party to the extent of his equipment; but the loss was 
more than counter-balanced by the 180 pounds of provisions 
which they had to pick up at the Depot. I was informed by 
radio of conditions. The following messages were exchanged: 


Byko: 
Returning tomorrow as some drastic changes of plans neces- 
sary and I want to work them out. Regards. 
GOULD. 


GOULD: 

Whatever new plan is made cannot help but be furthered by 
your continuing with Supporting Party now that you have started. 
I suggest that you reconsider going farther for observation of 
pulling conditions, etc., and to advance your loads. Another 
day’s observation may bring to light some new facts. 


BYRD. 


BYRD: 


| Not prepared to go further. Supporting Party will continue 
with lighter load. Very anxious to talk over situation with you. 
Regards. 


Larry. 


In view of the little time they had in which to accomplish 
the mission, I was particularly anxious that the Geological 
Party continue according to plan on this attempt, for the 
reason that every pound relayed then meant that much less to 
be hauled when the final start was made. On the morning 
of the 17th, I asked Dr. Gould to reconsider his decision: 


GOULD: 


I strongly urge you to make plans where you are instead of 
returning to make them. This can be done with the help of the 
radio. Here is a suggestion: Let Supporting Party continue with- 


START OF THE SOUTHERN PARTIES 289 


out dropping any loads which are intended to help the Geological 
Party. You wait where you are until arrival of Crockett, who can 
come lightly loaded and reach you tonight. He can be convoyed 
by Strom and Siple who will bring you whatever you need for ex- 
tended trip. You then proceed with your five teams and advance 
your present loads, perhaps assisting Supporting Party when you 
catch up with them. Proceed as far as you think it proper to go 
and, of course, the farther you go the more it will help your final 
advance. I think you can go at least 100 miles south. There are 
a number of things which can be done from 50 to 100 miles where 
Supporting Party has its heaviest loads, but, of course, you can 
reason this out better than we can. In other words, my proposition 
is that you make your plans now and go on with them rather than 
return here to do so. I am strongly against the Supporting Party 
making at this early date a decision to accomplish their mission 
only in part. You must have them succeed completely in order 
that the Geological Party may succeed completely. I understand, 
of course, that Supporting Party can drop dog food at 20 Mile 
Depot and continue to 44 Mile Depot and pick up the same 
amount of dog food dropped, but they ought not to drop any- 
thing that would be vital to success of Geological Party. This 
is my best judgment after careful thought and thorough discussion. 
On account of my great confidence in your judgment I will 
not order you to proceed in accordance with this suggestion, for 
you may have a better plan, but please let’s make a real effort to 
make plans by radio rather than waste the time and energy to re- 
turn to camp and simply repeat what we might now be able to 
do. Cheerio. 
Byvo. 


Byvo: 

We are not prepared to continue as you suggest. Have had 
great difficulty with stove and unable to fix it here. Supporting 
Party can continue slowly without changing its mission. All hands 
here agree that it will be impossible for Geological Party to ac- 
complish mission as planned. More far reaching changes in plans 
than you suggest are necessary and should be decided promptly. 
Can’t do it satisfactorily by radio. We must return to camp before 
taking our final departure and believe it best to do so at once and 
get the whole matter straightened out as it is not simple. Could 
you have seen man-hauling with the dogs for the last few days as 
we have, you would realize as we all do we have expected too much 
of them and must change our plans accordingly. It is the best 
judgment of all here that the Supporting Party continue and that 


we return at once. Cheerio. 
Larry. 


290 LITTLE AMERICA 


About six o’clock in the evening, October 17th, the Geo- 
logical Party returned to Little America, having dropped their 
loads at 20 Mile Depot. They came back exhausted, 
thoroughly chastened by the experience and oppressed by the 
thought that, in its larger aspects, the original plan of the 
Geological Party was doubtful of fulfillment. Thorne’s opin- 
ion as to the loads has been vindicated, but the matter was 
by no means as gloomy as it appeared. The men had paid 
infinite attention to detail in the planning, and I was convinced 
that by lightening loads the mission could be accomplished. 
Dr. Gould returned suffering from the effects of a fall while 
skiing. 

The Geological Party held a conference next morning, at 
which I was present. There the plan was considered in de- 
tail, in the chill light of the recent experience on the trail, and 
at first glance it appeared there was no alternative save to 
give up the first plan and lay out a less rigorous programme. 
But this neither Larry nor I was prepared to do, as long as 
there was a reasonable hope of success. I repeated then, as I 
had done on many occasions, the thought that the scientific 
objectives of the Geological Party were surely of equal im- 
portance to, if not of greater importance than the purely 
geographic investigations of the Aviation Unit; that if this 
party failed to accomplish the outlined work in the field, 
the fabric of the whole plan must be weakened, and the value 
of the expedition the less for it. Much of my hope was in 
that plan; and I was not yet willing to admit that it should be 
modified substantially because the first assault failed to carry 
everything before it. The Antarctic begrudges everything 
except hardships; no single effort can overwhelm it; only a 
stubborn, extended struggle can succeed. 

I did not propose to tell them how to lighten the loads to 
accomplish the mission, They could do that better than I. But 
I did promise every resource at the command of the expedi- 
tion. The only thing I could not do (and which some men 
did not understand) was to promise assistance by aviation. I 
would gladly give it in an emergency; but the few flights we 
had made the previous fall had convinced me that aerial opera- 
tions a long distance from base were risky; and that landing 
away from base should be attempted only when absolutely 


START OF THE SOUTHERN PARTIES 291 


necessary. I had secretly made up my mind to leave food by 
plane, but I did not want plans to be based on it. 

In order that part of its burdens be lessened, I proposed 
that the Geological Party give up the idea of assisting the 
Polar Flight unit in the laying down of a base at the foot of 
the Queen Maud Range; and to give it sufficient time to ac- 
complish its work, I promised to hold the City in the Bay of 
Whales until February 10; and, if that were not enough, to 
charter one of the whale chasers attached to the Ross Sea 
whaling fleet and have it stand by as late as February 2sth. 

I then left Dr. Gould and his men to work the problem 
out. I had confidence in them. They were determined, re- 
sourceful and courageous men. 

It was then proposed that the Geological Party prepare to 
depart within 48 hours for a second preliminary test trip, with 
the supplementary purpose of relaying the loads dumped at 20 
Mile Depot at least 100 miles south. 

That night, Friday, October 18th, Walden reported by 
radio that the Supporting Party had passed 40 Mile Depot and 
was now at 44 Mile Depot, having covered 20 miles that day 
in eight hours’ travelling. They took aboard 480 pounds of 
supplies for the Geological Party. He reported good surface, 
a strong wind and a temperature just above zero. This was 
indeed encouraging. 

Saturday, the to, brought an east wind. At Little 
America the sky was overcast, and a light snow fell at inter- 
vals; but at 44 Mile Depot they reported an all-day blizzard, 
with heavy drift, which forced them to remain in their sleep- 
ing bags. 

The following morning the wind abated, the temperature 
rose above zero, but the fog held and the Supporting Party 
groped its way well to the east of the mass of crevasses in 
which Amundsen’s party nearly came to grief and which he 
fittingly named The Trap. In spite of the poor conditions, 
they covered 20.8 miles. When they struck camp that night a 
dispatch from de Ganahl, who was navigator and radio opera- 
tor, said the easting had carried them safely past the area of 
disturbance, and from their tent they could see two large hay- 
cocks at its edge. That night another blizzard overtook them, 


holding the party in camp until noon, Monday. 


292 LITTLE AMERICA 


Sunday also saw the departure of the Geological Party. It 
was made up of five sledges—Goodale, Crockett, O’Brien, 
Thorne and Vaughan,—with Vaughan in charge. Dr. Gould 
remained in camp to prepare his final plan. That night 
Vaughan reported by radio that all was well; they had picked 
up the first loads and were camped at 20 Mile Depot. 

Monday, the wind, which had been holding in the east, 
shifted to the east-southeast, and the temperature dropped fast, 
ending the warm spell which had lessened the difficulties ; that 
day the Supporting Party logged only 9.7 miles and the Geo- 
logical Party 11. The first reported a temperature of 17° 
below zero, the second 40° below and at Little America it 
reached 25° below, and was still falling. 

Tuesday, the 22nd, both parties rose from damp and icy 
sleeping bags and flung themselves forward again. Vaughan 
reported his party was now 45 miles south, having made only 
14 miles. Birch and Spy, he reported, were weakening and 
progress was distressingly slow. From the Supporting Party 
there was no word; but de Ganahl said later they had covered 
eight miles in six hours of fierce pulling: “It was like sledg- 
ing on sand. We would go 200 yards and then stop. We 
camped early with the dogs exhausted. It was bitter cold in 
the open, but we preferred to keep moving rather than freeze 
in the sleeping bags.” 

As these discouraging reports came in—as the weather 
remained cold and overcast, holding the Fairchild to the 
ground—gloom descended on the camp. We could not, of 
course, witness the struggle; but we knew the character of the 
men who were out on the Barrier, we appreciated their diffi- 
culties, and it was as clear as if the scene were before our eyes 
that only the most wretched kind of going could be holding 
them back. Surely we could not be defeated so early in the 
game! Yet the evidence was before our eyes, in the terse 
messages, the discouragingly low mileage, the hard-wrung 
admissions of troubles. 

On the 23rd Vaughan radioed: 


Copiv: 


16 miles today. Advise strongly our returning. Birch, Spy, 
Torngnac, Ski, Amy and Tennant all weakening. Immediate rest 


ty yani NOW NIAS vy chapchnyd AHL NO SAVO oxlaynp SWvay, eoc 


i el a al : -~ p > 


THE GEOLOGICAL PARTY. 


Left to right, seated —Ceot e A. Thorne, Jr., Frederick E. Crockett, Dr. Laurence M. 
Gould, Norman Vaughan; Standing :—Edward E. Goodale and John S. O’Brien. 


THE GEOLOGICAL Party At AMUNDSEN’S CAIRN. 


Dr. Gould is reading the note which Amundsen left there in 1912. 


START OF THE SOUTHERN PARTIES 293 


necessary if they are to serve us later. Important deficiencies 
found in gear. Much overhauling necessary. 


Gould replied : 


VAUGHAN: 


_ Very sorry if you are unable to make 100 miles on this pre- 
liminary trip. Can you not try to proceed with lighter loads and 
let poor dogs run? Must cut our time in field short at least 1 5 
days and you might as well lighten loads accordingly now, but 
above all else plan to come back from this trip with all the dogs. 


Vaughan said: 


GOULD: 

75 miles is limit at which can bring all dogs back. Think 
more mileage a hindrance rather than help. Will do whatever you 
say. 


Gould replied : 


VAUGHAN: 

Please take rest of day or two and see if situation doesn’t look 
better for dogs. Cannot see how we can make 440 miles later if 
dogs can’t do 100 miles now. Don’t quite understand what you 
mean that more mileage a hindrance rather than help. So far you 
have made exceptionally good time and we have been greatly en- 
couraged here. 


Vaughan replied: 


GOULD : 
Will lighten loads and proceed. Have not been driving dogs 
to limit in order to save them for final trip. Cannot guarantee to 


bring all dogs back. 


There was no word from either of the southern parties on 
October 24th. McKinley and Feury made a series of test runs 
in the snowmobile, for which Czegka had built a new set of 
wider treads, on the theory that a wider webbing would be 
effective over soft snow. Even with this, however, the machine 
became bogged several times, not far from camp, and the two 
men had to dig it out with snow shovels. On firm crust it was 
superb. It could then make 20 miles per hour with ease. We 


294 LITTLE AMERICA 


were sufficiently encouraged to start it south, in the hope that 
it might survive the Barrier long enough to mitigate substan- 
tially the burdens of the Geological Party. With a clatter of 
machinery, the snowmobile rolled down the decline to Ver-sur- 
Mer Inlet. Half the time it was obscured in a blizzard of its 
own making. After much reconnoitering, McKinley and Feury 
finally found passage through the pressure ridges to the west- 
ward; for the dog trail to the south was absolutely impassable 
to the snowmobile. McKinley brought out a platoon of snow 
shovellers and they smoothed out the rough spots. The snow- 
mobile charged the surface, carrying everything before it. It 
was left south of the pressure ridges, and the men returned to 
camp, to evolve a means of carrying the Barrier on the morrow. 
The machine towed three sledges, loaded with food for the 
bases. 


Friday 
October 25th 


Sky overcast, east wind, temperature 10° below, although 
zero at noon. 

Conditions on the trail are apparently improving. The 
Geological Party reports that it is 100 miles south, having 
made good time since lightening the loads. 

No word from the Supporting Party. They must have 
passed the 100 mile mark the day before yesterday. 

The City has gone into dry dock, Captain Melville reports, 
for a final overhauling before departure. 

Snowmobile is off. McKinley’s platoon of snow shovellers, 
after considerable effort, got the machine up on the Barrier 
and started it south. Strom is in charge, with Black and Feury 
assisting him. The snowmobile crew is certainly optimistic. 
They shot it across the filled-in crevasses like a tank bridging 
a trench, and scornfully asked McKinley if this was the well- 
known Barrier of which they had heard so much. I warned 
them to proceed carefully, and especially ordered Strom to see 
that Feury, who was driving, wore a life line while crossing 
crevasses. 

Not long ago we heard agonizing groans from the bay, and 
I think it is a mother seal giving birth to pups. The sound 
carries wonderfully clear on the still air. 


START OF THE SOUTHERN PARTIES 295 


Saturday 
October 20% 

Better news today. 

Walden reported that the Supporting Party made 1 3.8 miles 
on the 24th, 11.5 on the 25th and 20 today. Today they laid 
Depot No. 2 at Lat. 80° to’ S., Long. 163° 35’ W. They 
left 200 pounds of provisions. 

De Ganahl, in his press dispatch, said the going during the 
last three days was very hard, with the surface alternating be- 
tween a granular hard crust and soft patches of drift snow. 
The wind picked up drift, forcing them to keep up their parka 
hoods. Apparently it is very cold, but de Ganahl has lost his 
thermometer and sends as the daily reading “the average of 
guesses.” This has provoked much amusement. 

Ten miles south of Depot No. 2 they were forced to 
abandon one sledge, to get rid of the extra weight. 

No schedule with the Geological Party, which is returning to 
camp. 

No word from the snowmobile party. 

Little America is quiet. Aviation Unit working on the 
planes. It is a shame we cannot get some flying in. 


Later 


Vaughan reports the Geological Party made its second 


depot 99 miles out last night. 
The day’s march was 24 miles. Some of the dogs have 
weakened and are being carried back on empty sledges. 


Sunday 
October 27th 


Three things impress themselves upon my mind as a result 
of the Geological Party’s two trips: 

1. Although the original loads were much too heavy, as 
some believed before the start, the actual situation was by no 
means as black as it appeared to be. 

2. In order to accomplish its mission, the Geological Party 
had to advance its heavy loads at least 100 miles south. 

3. The experience gained on the trail was absolutely neces- 
sary in view of the lack of experience of all hands in the 


party. 


296 LITTLE AMERICA 


The Geological Party should now be able to make its ad- 
vance as planned. 

No word from any of the trail parties today. I am par- 
ticularly anxious to get in touch with Vaughan, to have him 
stand by the snowmobile party for a radio conversation so 
that I can learn what progress it is making. 

The snowmobile party is the only unit which has been 
allowed to go into the field with radio, and I have regretted 
letting them go. If they keep to the trail, they will be all 
right, especially as they have dog teams to the north and south 
of them. 


Monday 
October 28th 


Igloo is in the infirmary again. 

With the slickness for which he is distinguished, he broke 
away this morning and hot-footed it for the wild pups. When 
he came in he was covered with blood. One of the pups tore 
out the stitches of the old wound, and he had a new gash on 
his throat. While Mulroy held him, Dr. Coman took a stitch 
in the new wound. He could do nothing with the old cut, 
from which all the flesh had been: ripped, and patched it over 
with cotton. 

But Igloo is not at all chastened. 

Geological Party came in on the run just about supper 
time. Men in fine shape, but some of the dogs worn out. On 
the return trip, they covered 24 miles Saturday, 39 Sunday 
and 36 today. Vaughan said that the first few days after 
start were very cold, temperature varying from 40° below to 
20° below. Their faces were severely burned and are peel- 
ing. Clothes which were soaked with perspiration while 
travelling froze before they could get them off when they 
pitched camp at night. 

They passed the snowmobile party Sunday, at 11 o’clock, 
63 miles from camp. It is apparently getting along as well 
as was expected. 

I wish we had Taylor’s dogs here. His latest radio says 
that the Kosmos is lying outside the pack, which is unusually 
heavy this year. 


START OF THE SOUTHERN PARTIES 297 


Tuesday | 
October 20th 


The more I think about the return journey of the Geo- 
logical Party, the more I am impressed with it. The men 
made 99 miles in three days, which is one of the best three 
days’ runs on record. There is no need to be pessimistic. 
Gould is going over the equipment and making ready for the 
final advance. 

Walden reports the Supporting Party at noon today laid 
Depot No. 3 at Lat. 81° S., Long. 163° 45’ W. They are 
now at the edge of the heavily crevassed area which Amundsen 
encountered. Fortunately, they have put down most of their 
loads. 

This morning we blasted one of the haycocks to the east 
of the camp with Trojan powder. These ice formations are as 
tough as steel. Two cartridges made no impression, but three, 
when exploded together, opened up a fairly large hole. It 
exposed a large hollow and a corridor running in the direction 
of the next nearest haycock. The walls and dome were hung 
with beautiful crystals, and Dr. Gould discovered the larg- 
est crystal we have yet seen. He recovered it carefully and 
has had it photographed. Several men crawled into the aper- 
ture, and followed the tunnel for about thirty feet, at which 
point it narrowed down, although it continued as far as they 
could see. 

The haycocks which I have examined are dome-shaped and 
stand about 25 feet high. They seem to be a solid block of 
ice, covered with snow. Dr. Gould is taking a series of photo- 
graphs in an attempt to show the development of a haycock 
from successive condensations around a small vent hole in a 
crevasse to large pyramidal mounds. So far as I have been 
able to observe, the haycocks occur at points where there are 
likely to have been pressure blocks formed in the old bay that 
was once here. (There is evidence that this basin was once 
a bay in the Barrier. As a result of the accumulation of 
snow, it filled in slowly, increasing in height until it became 
part of the Barrier. In this way, I think, the Barrier renews 
itself and compensates for the loss of the sections that go out 
to sea.) The cold air and the warmer sea water below causes 
fog, and thus the haycocks grow by condensation of moisture. 


298 LITTLE AMERICA 


There is probably enough movement in the ice where the pres- 
sure used to be, to keep open water more or less under the 
blocks. 

All the crevasses in the neighborhood appear to be made up 
of solid green ice from sea level down. No doubt the size of 
the formation is substantially increased by the accumulation 
of drift, but in every haycock which we examined we found 
a central vent hole, through whi e process goes on. These 
haycocks, by the way, are a, onu from those found 
by Amundsen further south, which were roofed by thin crusts 
of snow. 

Wednesday 
October 30th 


Supporting Party has met dreadful conditions. Walden 
reported by radio: 


CoMMANDER Byvo: 

Found frightfully crevassed area starting with blind covered 
chasms without warning 81° 5’ S. Believe it fatal for snow- 
mobile to proceed beyond 81°. Tried to penetrate mass hollow 
snow and haycocks at 81° 10’, but forced to retrace steps and 
change course 100 True. Believe we can find crossing to east. 
No imagination can picture conditions due south of Depot No. 3. 
Our position dead reckoning Lat. 81° tg’ S., Long. 163° 25’ MY. 


T answered: 


WALDEN: 


Sorry to hold you up but you must in some way warn snow- 
mobile not to enter blind crevassed area. You must go back to 
beginning of blind chasms and leave message in conspicuous place. 
Better leave messages in several places. This is of vital im- 
portance. Tell snowmobile party to return here as soon as pos- 
sible. Take your time in finding a safe place across crevasses. 
Safety and care above all else. Mark trail carefully with flags. 
Congratulations. 


The conditions which they had to contend with were made 
apparent in a subsequent message from de Ganahl: 

“The peaceful Barrier showed its sternest front today 
when the monotony of one hundred sixty miles of unexciting 
sledging was broken by our efforts to penetrate the maze 
of crevasses, covered chasms and hollow haycocks eleven 
miles south of depot 3. The tents were pitched tonight 


START OF THE SOUTHERN PARTIES 209 


between two pitfalls three miles east of the scene of our 
escapes from whatever is below the countless hollow crusts 
over which we passed. The Barrier trembles and roars 
occasionally as new traps open in this area where the pres- 
sure of the ice is equalized. From 81° south this morning 
a long line oi knolls, jagged peaks and rolling domes 
glistened majestically on the crest of a hilltop stretching east 
and west. We had go e miles when Bursey who was 
leading the roped caravan swung his sled to a halt. His 
dogs were on the roof of a round hollow pit fifty feet in 
diameter. There were many such invisible caverns on the 
ascent of the hill, some filled, some bridged with snow— 
evidently craters of haycocks opened by released pressure. 
Soon crevasses, a few open, some filled, most roofed, crossed 
our path. Five miles of dodging and rushing brought us 
to a stop. To the south and west were graceful domes, fan- 
tastic peaks and black shadows—ugly and forbidding lines 
of upheaved ice. To the east, a deep valley was crossed and 
recrossed by scores of the gray depressions we had learned 
to respect. Well roped we planned a short reconnaissance 
on foot. Walden stepped away from his sled into a crevasse 
and sank down to his waist. He was pulled out again and 
went down into a second. We reached the hill top ridge 
running south west between villages of haycocks. We pro- 
ceeded with the teams. In five minutes we were shut in by 
hollow domes, every step on a thin trembling roof. We 
crossed a safe looking ridge and slid down ten feet from an 
open hole with blackness for a bottom and turned the teams 
to the west. Bursey slipped over the brink of a pit as we 
crossed a narrow bridge between it and haycocks, but the 
rope dragged him back. There was a hundred foot hole to 
the left and countless haycocks to the right. We followed 
a narrow highway west until a wide, thinly covered crevasse 
blocked our path to the hopeless area ahead. There was no 
room to turn the teams between haycocks. Braathen roped 
and on skis tested the largest and we rushed the dogs around 
and over the dome to retrace our steps a few hundred yards. 
Bursey stopped to fix a harness and the surface sank under 
Braathen’s sled. The teams were hurried forward and pulled 
him to a thicker roof. The route flag slipped through into 


300 LITTLE AMERICA 


space. Below everything was hollow. We tried a valley 
with many crevasses but Braathen’s experience and short 
dodges brought us safe around. Evidences of continual im- 
provement. All believe we will find a way through to the 
east. 

DE GANAHL.” 


e Thursday 


October 31% 


The Supporting Party is safely through the crevasses at 
last. Thank God for that. They were sorely pressed yester- 
day. 

De Ganahl, in a message today, said they spent the day 
reconnoitering through a valley of broken ice honeycombed 
by pressure, and reached firm Barrier just as a fog closed in 
behind them. He believes it to be the most treacherous area 
ever crossed in the Antarctic. 

“Great upheavals have taken place here since Amundsen’s 
time,” the message said. “Nothing he describes cap compare 
with it. It was a restless sleep for all last night, for every 
few hours we were awakened by thunder announcing the birth 
of a new crevasse and shaking the hollow snow beneath us. 

“After an early breakfast Bursey and Braathen retraced 
their steps to the northern limit of the crevassed area to place 
a warning on the Barrier for the snowmobile party. Then 
Walden, Braathen and I, roped and on skis, worked our way 
over and around crevasses to the southeast, hoping to find an 
opening in the hopeless looking range to the south. 

“From the high ridge we had glimpses of the firm Barrier, 
but three miles of pitted mountain lay before us. After lunch, 
Braathen, Bursey and I proceeded on skis in an effort to 
thread our way between open black holes connected by covered 
crevasses everywhere. On approaching the range we finally 
found a narrow ridge between open chasms leading to a net- 
work of canyons on the summit of a large hollow area and 
camouflaged by a thin roof of ice. Braathen’s skill and ex- 
perience on skis enabled us to tap our way step by step from 
one firm ridge to another. The trail was often two yards 
wide, bordered on each side by black ravines or thin-roofed 
haycocks. In three hours we marked a zig-zag trail a mile 


=. 


ere 


THE SUPPORTING Party, 


Left to right :—Chris Braathen, Arthur T. Walden, Joe deGanahl and Jack Bursey. 


diy | i 3 8 AT o M u tu 


DEGANAHL (AT THE Kato SET) AND WALDEN ON THE TRAIL 
COMMUNICATE WITH BASE. 


THE Eko og A Lone HAUL. 


The snowmobile party, Strom, Black and Feury, return to Little America after 80 miles of man-hauling. 


AKT OR THE SOUTHERN PARTIES | 301 


and a half through the heart of the ridge and returned with 
doubts as to whether our sledges could get over the bridges, 
sharp shoulders and steep inclines. 

“But there was no other way through, the hills being im- 
passable to the east and west. Teams and men were roped 
separately and we followed the ragged line of flags. Walden 
said he had never seen anything like it. We stopped and 
turned to view the area before fog set in. It seemed as if 
the gods had been playing with chalk cliffs and left them 
scattered and broken on the tidy Barrier floor.” 

I have sent them a message of congratulation. By and 
large, this is the best piece of work done by the expedition. 

Still waiting for good flying weather. 

Today is the warmest day in months—above zero all day, 
and now 12° above. Cloudy. 

I caused new safety rules to be posted today. AP men 
who leave the camp on walks to the Barrier or bay ice are 
ordered to sign names and route taken on a pad, so that in 
case of accident the camp will know ip what direction to make 
a search. 


Friday 
November Ist 


Another warm day, thermometer registering as high as 
12° above. 

The Supporting Party reached Lat. 81° 45’ S., Long. 163° 
20’ W., today, put down Depot No. 4 and are now preparing 
to return. 

I have begged them to employ the utmost caution in re- 
tracing their steps through the crevasses, and to find the snow- 
mobile party at all costs. There has been no word from them 
since the Geological Party returned. 

What a blessing the radio 15! Thanks to it there has been 
such close connection between the base and field parties. I have 
been kicking myself for permitting the snowmobile party to 
start out without it. 


Saturday 
November 2nd 


Supporting Party homeward bound. They made 29.9 
miles today. 


302 LITTLE AMERICA 


Geological Party has been overhauling its gear and will 
begin final advance Monday. | 
Still warm, overcast, moderate east wind. No flying. 


Sunday 
November 3rd 


Supporting Party on the return is safely through the cre- 
vasses, which they have named Chasm Pass. Fog blotted out 
broken features of mountains, but did not hide flags. De 
Ganahl reports that in the first two camps south of the pres- 
sure ridges they heard a continuous rumble of breaking ice, 
and a narrow crevasse opened up under the tent while Walden 
and Braathen slept. Walden counted 200 crevasses which 
crossed the trail within two miles, which does not take into 
account the crevasses to right and left. 

These men, the veteran Walden and the youngsters, have 
made a magnificent journey. 

Still warm and cloudy, wind E.N.E. 

Loads for the base-laying flight have been worked out, 
and we are waiting for good weather to make altitude and 
speed tests with the Ford, which we will have on the surface 
within two days. 


With the first phase of operations completed, the camp 
now turned to the task of initiating the others. Monday, No- 
vember 4th, at 1:30 o'clock p.m., the Geological Party, with 
Dr. Gould in command, and Vaughan, Crockett, Goodale, 
Thorne and O’Brien completing the party, began the final 
advance. They carried fairly heavy loads, which would be 
increased as they picked up supplies at the various depots, 
and would reach a maximum load at Depot No. 4. They 
started with confidence. That night they struck camp at 20 
Mile Depot, and a radio from Dr. Gould solved the mystery 
of the snowmobile party. They met the crew hiking home, 
painfully hauling a sledge, about 15 miles south. The machine 
had broken down about 75 miles south, and the crew were 
forced to abandon it. 

I regretted the loss of the snowmobile, but as my faith in 
it was never great, I was not disappointed. That the men 
were safe was far more important. 


START OF THE SOUTHERN PARTIES 303 


Wilson and snow petrels were now seen about the camp 
in increasing numbers, heralding warmer weather. 


Tuesday, the 5th, was a busy day. The Ford came out 
of its hangar, under its own power, with the 525 horse power 
Cyclone in its nose pulling it up the incline while the rest of 
the camp manned a block and tackle. Balchen was at the 
controls. He taxied it into position alongside the Fairchild, 
and the plane was firmly secured by means of “dead men” in 
case of a blizzard. The Ford was in excellent shape. 

The camp prepared to welcome the snowmobile party, 
whose vaunted promises to conquer the Barrier were not lightly 
forgotten. As the poor fellows had been man-hauling for eight 
days, I dispatched Siple, with his team of pups, and Dean Smith 
on skis to give them a lift home. While they were gone, the 
conspirators decorated the radio tower and mess hall with 
streamers and confetti, a number of amusing messages of 
greeting were posted, a sign “Welcome home” was hung 
over the entrance to the mess hall, and the cameramen rigged 
up a dummy camera which they put into position along the path 
leading to Ver-sur-Mer Inlet. In the midst of these preparations, 
Siple and Smith returned with the news that the party had 
spurned the offer of assistance, saying in effect, that in view 
of the fact they had walked this far, they might as well con- 
tinue the few remaining miles under their own steam. They 
were, it seemed, quite chagrined and testy. 

In a little while the plodding figures were seen in the Bay. 
As they came nearer, Very signals were sent into the air, 
Czegka operated the dummy camera with the utmost gravity 
and cheers rent the air. The celebration reached its height 
when a message which Blackie’s wife, who of course had 
not learned of their cruel fate, had radioed from New York, 
was delivered. It said: “With you every step of the way.” 
The men were tired and burned by the sun, but they took the 
affair in good humor. 

The snowmobile, they said, ran smoothly and fast on firm 
crust, and did well even on soft snow. But a combination of 
sastrugi and soft snow proved to be too much. However, 
the machine got much farther south than I ever expected it 
would, and as a result of the experience I think a suitable 


304 LITTLE AMERICA 


surface machine for Antarctic travel can be designed. The 
real cause of its difficulty was dirt in the engine, which began 
to work into the gas lines, so that Feury had to take them 
down several times, freezing his hands during the operation. 
The constant bucking weakened the rear end. Two hours 
after they passed the Geological Party, returning from its 
second trip, the snowmobile became imprisoned in a soft drift, 
and after a battle, the rear end expired. Strom shouldered 
a 40-pound knapsack, Black and Feury hitched a harness to 
the 300-pound sledge, and they took the trail home. 

While the Aviation Unit went ahead with the conditioning 
of the Ford, both field parties made excellent progress. 
Wednesday, Nov. 6, Gould reported that the Geological 
Party was sixty miles south; and the homeward bound Support- 
ing Party, which had picked up tools, radio equipment and per- 
sonal clothing abandoned on the snowmobile, was only five 
days’ journey from Little America. Under the hood they 
found, de Ganahl reported with delight, radios from home. 

Their progress thereafter was rapid: November 6, they 
made 30.3 miles; 7th, 26.5, meeting the outward bound 
Geological Party; the 8th, they were snow-bound in a blizzard 
which did not touch Little America, making only 9.5 miles, 
and on Saturday, the gth, they came in at a great clip, having 
travelled 46 miles from morning. The same day the Geo- 
logical Party reached Depot No. 2. Gould reported: 


Arrived depot No. 2 this afternoon and spent afternoon chang- 
ing sledges and loads. High sastrugi and soft snow and very 
poor visibility have made hard going last two days, but dogs 
are in better shape than when we left camp. Everything looks 
bright tonight, including the weather. 


The Supporting Party came in, bearded and tired, pant- 
ing less from exertion than for “ham and eggs,” as de Ganahl 
said. In my diary I wrote: 

“T cannot praise Walden, de Ganahl, Bursey and Braathen 
too highly. They proved that they could defeat the early 
spring cold, and now their job is done. They went through 
without a suspicion of a complaint. It was a tough job, on the 
successful execution of which hangs most of our spring plans. 
Thanks to them, we may now go ahead with confidence.” 


CHAPTER XIII 
THE BASE-LAYING FLIGHT 


THERE was a bit of excitement about the polar plane on 
November 9th. We were heating the engines with the usual 
method—that is, using a canvas hood with a funnel leading 
down to a pressure gasoline stove. Just as the mechanics 
were ready to start the two outboard Whirlwinds, gasoline 
dripped on the funnel. It caught fire and spread to the whole 
hood and engine, and there was danger the flames might 
reach the tank before we could douse it with pyrenes. This 
was a bad moment, and it was lucky that we had an all-metal 
plane. The damage was slight, but involved another day’s 
delay while the mechanics renewed the wiring and Ronne 
made a new funnel. 

Except for an overcast sky, the weather had not been bad 
for ten days, with the thermometer fluctuating between 5° below 
and 12° above zero and the wind, never very strong, shifting 
from south to east. Sunday, November to, came in chilly, 
17° below, but the air warmed up as the day advanced and a 
Io-mile wind from the east chased away the clouds, giving 
us a clear horizon. So we made the first flight of the sea- 
son. 

With Bubier as passenger, Parker took the Fairchild on 
a test hop. Before he took off, he taxied up and down the 
field, testing the controls and skis. The surface was quite 
soft and the skis, the bottoms of which were covered with ice, 
sank rather deep, but Parker beat down a fairly firm runway 
after two or three charges and finally wore off the ice. The 
ship then cleared quite cleanly. When he came down, Smith, 
Balchen and June each made test hops of thirty minutes over 
the Bay of Whales, during which the aerial camera, radio 
and the plane itself were tested. In all, the motor ran con- 


305 


306 LITTLE AMERICA 


tinuously for four hours before we called it a day, seventeen 
men had made flights, and the ship was reported to be in 
perfect flying trim. 

On the following day, the mechanics started the Whirl- 
winds on the Ford, but the test hop was deferred until the 
mechanics cleaned out the fuel lines, in which dirt had col- 
lected. That night the Geological Party reported it had tra- 
velled 26 miles during the last two days, and all was well. 


Tuesday 
November Iath 


No flying today. The Ford was ready to go, but wind 
shifted to ESE, picking up a slight drift, and sky cloudy. 

Brown and Melville report both vessels are making final 
preparations for southern voyage, and crews in fine condition 
and eager to start. 


W ednesday 
November 13th 


A splendid day, 14° below, a barely perceptible east wind 
and perfectly clear horizon. ; 

The Ford went aloft at 3 o’clock this afternoon, with 
Parker as test pilot, Balchen as engineer and eight passengers. 

The plane was off in less than thirty seconds. The big 
Cyclone in the nose has certainly improved the performance 
of these ships. 

Later, the other pilots took their turn at the controls, and 
I tested my navigational equipment on a hop 10 miles south 
of 20 Mile Depot. The depot was very plainly marked, even 
from the air, and it was possible to see the trail extending 
indefinitely south. 

After supper we loaded the Ford with snow blocks, giving 
it a load of 13,000 pounds, and took it up on an altitude test, 
to determine whether it will be able to get us over the moun- 
tains. The snow blocks were of known weights and could be 
dropped before landing. At 10,000 feet the port engine began 
to skip and the pilots decided to come down. It was bitterly 
cold at the higher levels. 

All hands are now waiting for a ride to 14,000 feet. 


THE BASE-LAYING FLIGHT 307 


Thursday 
November r4th 


Worked all night, and at 6 o’clock a.m. the mechanics 
decided to install a new carburetor on the balky engine. 
Temperature this morning was 19° below. 


Later 


An 18 mile wind from the ESE is causing considerable 
drift. No flying. All hands indoors. 

Gould reports the Geological Party camped tonight at Lat. 
81° tg’ S., on the edge of Chasm Pass, which they will pene- 
trate tomorrow. I wish them luck. 


Friday 
November 15th 


No flying. Warmer today and clear. But mechanics 
busy installing new carburetor and lagging the gas lines. Koi- 
lowing the flags laid down by Supporting Party, She Geolog- 
ical Party passed through Chasm Pass today without “tis- 
hap or adventure,” Gould reports. 


Saturday 
November 16th 
Morning 


Aviation unit worked all last night. It appears that the 
air bleeds in the carburetor were much too large, causing too 
much air to be drawn in while the engine turned at inter- 
mediate revolutions. The mechanics have soldered the bleeds 
and drilled the jets a size smaller. 

The directional results with the radio compass have been 
surprisingly good. So, too, with the improvised radio beacon. 
Hanson’s preliminary tests have thus far been limited to a 
radius of 25 miles, but the signals come in so strong that we 
are confident that both the radio compass and the radio beacon 
can be depended upon within a radius of 75 to 100 miles. 
If we do run into bad weather on the return leg of a flight, 
these ingenious inventions should be very handy. | 

Wind shifted from east to east-southeast, growing 
stronger and picking up drift. Haines found in his balloon 


308 LITTLE AMERICA 


runs this morning a 40-mile wind at 10,000 feet and a 125- 
mile wind at 20,000 feet. So there will be no altitude or load 
tests today, unless conditions change, which he doubts. 


Sunday 
November 17th 


One of the warmest days in months, 12° above zero, a 
gentle wind from the southwest and the third clear day in 
succession. 

Ford took off at 10:30 o’clock this morning, with a load 
of 13,000 pounds. She climbed to 12,000 feet in an hour and 
one-half, from which height the men in the plane could see 
the summits of the Rockefeller Mountains sticking up like 
mounds in the snow. 

Then we ran a number of speed, altitude and load tests 
over a marked course, with revolutions at full throttle and 
all the way down to 1450 K.P. M. 


Later 


Have decided to make base-laying flight tonight. The 
plane is being loaded and we shall take off within an hour. 
It is only necessary to fill the oil tanks and start the engines. 

In addition to fuel and oil necessary for the flight, as well 
as other equipment, we shall carry 390 pounds of food, 200 gal- 
lons of gasoline, 25 gallons of oil and a large gasoline stove (for 
warming the engines) for the cache. We shall also carry 25 
gallons of gasoline and a gasoline stove for the Geological 
Party. Smith will pilot, June will act as radio engineer and 
relief pilot, and McKinley will, of course, be the mapper. 

It is mighty good to be starting. 


Later 

No luck. We are too impatient. 

Radio conditions have been absolutely dead all day. Every 
man in the Radio Division has tried his hand at the main 
set, but failed to raise a station. We have been unable to 
make contact with the New York Times, the ships at New 
Zealand, the Geological Party—in fact, for the past few hours 
we have been cut off from the world. 


THE BASE-LAYING FLIGHT 309 


It would be stupid to undertake the flight without radio. 
So we shall sit still, until the ether returns to normal. 

The base-laying flight is one of the most uncertain opera- 
tions of the whole expedition. If we fail to get down our 
base, we cannot make the polar flight. If we crack up, we 
shall not only be forced to give up the polar flight, but we 
shall also nullify the magnificent work of the Supporting and 
Geological parties, for the latter party must then put all its 
efforts into the job of helping us back to Little America. 

By the time we get back, if this thing comes to pass, it 
will be too late to undertake the prolonged flight to the east- 
ward which we plan to make after the polar flight. 

Landing away from base in the polar regions is always 
dangerous, because of the inability of the pilot to judge surface 
accurately from the air; weather is also an uncertain quantity. 
This is one of my pet convictions and I would not attempt 
this landing if it were not absolutely necessary. If the land- 
ing can be done, I believe that Dean Smith can do it. He 
has a tremendous responsibility. 


9 o'clock A. M. 
Monday 
November 18th 


The mysterious enervation of the ether is over, and we 
shall make the flight at once. Engines are turning over and 
Mulroy has put aboard the fuel cans for the base. 

Temperature—several degrees above zero and rising: sky 
—cloudless: wind—on the surface a 6-mile wind from the 
southwest, and a quartering 20-mile wind at 2,000 feet 
according to Haines’s balloon runs. 

A perfect day for the flight. 

Haines said: “You might wait another year for a better 


7) 


ope 


We took off at 9:40 o'clock a.m., with Smith at She 
controls. Thirty seconds after the start, after a run of less 
than a thousand feet, the three engines lifted our 14,300 
pounds of dead weight from the snow, and the plane climbed 
rapidly, bearing to the south. A3 the engines took up a 
steady rhythm, under Smith’s deft synchronizing touch, my 


310 LITTLE AMERICA 


thoughts and hopes raced ahead. What would we find at 
the foot of the mountains? A firm, smooth surface? Or 
a surface torn and marred by crevasses and sastrugi? So 
much—everything—hung in the balance. 

Little America, a few dark roofs and a mass of trodden 
snow, dropped steadily astern, the radio towers became mere 
black pins against the white, and the Ross Sea, open, black, 
and strewn with icebergs, stretched indefinitely to the northern 
horizon. 

Our altitude was 1,200 feet, and Smith kept the plane 
at this height for some time. For more than a year, we had 
been wondering if we could follow the dog team trail from 
the air. We had discussed the problem backward and for- 
ward and were now about to find the answer. 

Down below, the southern trail wound through the 
crevasses southwest of Little America, but we could not see 
it. Reaching the Barrier, we had to search for the trail, and 
for a time I thought we were not going to be able to follow 
it. Finally we sighted it—a thin, broken, ribbon. The sun 
compass checked with the direction of the trail. We could, 
therefore, keep on an exact course with the sun compass, 
when and if we missed the trail, and sooner or later would 
pick it up again. Smith had to keep some distance to the 
right or left of the trail in order to see it at all. 

We saw 20 Mile Depot, a few snow blocks surrounded 
by a welter of footsteps. Over the beacons the western sun 
threw long gray shadows. 

Visibility was excellent. The atmosphere was wonderfully 
smooth. 

McKinley, who was just getting ready to send his cameras 
into action, touched my sleeve, pointed down and grinned. 
In the center of the trail lay a dark hulk, the forlorn wreck 
of the snowmobile. 

Snow, snow everywhere, rising and falling in swelling 
folds, meeting the blue of the sky with a sharp clear line. 

We passed Depot No, 2 at a speed in excess of a hundred 
miles per hour. We could see the crevassed area long before 
we reached it. I had been intent on navigating when suddenly 
Dean turned in his seat and wiggled his finger. Dark shadows 
appeared in the smooth floor of the Barrier ahead—the 


THE BASE-LAYING FLIGHT 311 


crevasses. As we approached, the pattern evolved. What 
a frightful mess it was! It was a frozen whirlpool. Even 
under the softening influence of vertical vision and altitude, 
the horrible nature of the surface was apparent. The area 
was traversed by massive pressure ridges and crevasses, the 
sides of which showed black and blue in the sun, and the 
shearing movement of the Barrier had wrought destruction 
of millions of tons of frozen ice and snow. Had the guns 
of half a dozen armies played upon the scene, they could 
not have worked as much destruction. 

To the east a mass of crevasses was spread fanwise, 
furrowed and partly drifted over. 

Here for two days the Supporting Party had risked its 
necks; and we were over it in two, perhaps three minutes. 
I almost felt ashamed. 

From the surface the crevassed area appeared to them to 
stretch indefinitely from east to west. But from the air we 
saw that it was not more than 25 or 30 miles from end to 
end, and a fine route around it lay to the eastward. 

Amundsen had reported two high peaks to the eastward 
in Latitude 82 degrees. He did not name these peaks, and 
thought they were part of Carmen Land. I searched for 
them with binoculars, but could not see them. Did the Barrier 
continue indefinitely to the east? I decided that on the return 
flight, as well as on the polar flight, we should have to in- 
vestigate this area. 

Smooth and undulating, the Barrier stretched to the south. 
The crumbled dome of Depot No. 4 was underneath. 

“We ought to meet the Geological Party any minute,” 
I shouted. 

“I see them now,” McKinley answered. 

Five teams, scattered and each making its way alone, 
were headed up a long, rolling rise in the Barrier. 

“They haven’t heard us yet,” McKinley shouted. 

That was apparent, for they had not turned. Smith 
brought the ship down in a long, curving glide. The poor 
devils, we saw quickly, were having a hard time. Some of 
the men were in harness, pulling with the dogs, and the sight 
of their bending backs, the separation of the sledges, the 
very, very slow progress told everything. They had picked 


312 LITTLE AMERICA 


up a maximum load at Depot No. 4, and the men had their 
toes dug in and the dogs had their bellies to the snow trying 
to keep the sledges moving. 

“Must be cold down there,” McKinley yelled. “They 
have their parkas up—can’t hear the engines.” 

We passed them at 300 feet, swinging low in salute, and: 
caught sight of two or three white faces lifted up. 

“Don’t cheer, boys,” June said, “the poor devils are dy- 


ing.” 
If ever a Conclusive contrast was struck between the new 
and the old methods of polar travelling, it was then. 

We dropped them a bag of letters and miscellaneous equip- 
ment and continued on. Smith had done a fine job in keeping 
to the trail, which was always elusive. On the few occasions 
when we lost the trail, the sun compass took the plane on a 
bee line until we sighted it again. 

A little later to the southwestward a magnificent peak 
appeared in the sky. It was the strangest mountain I have 
ever seen. It lacked body and base. It was a towering, trun- 
cated, gray-black peak pinned against a cloudless sky. Half- 
way down it ended, with a clear line of breakage, against the 
shimmering brilliance of daylight, as if the agency responsible 
for its structure had started to build it from the top, grew 
tired when the job was half done and left it there, like Ma- 
homet’s tomb, between earth and heaven. A mirage, I thought. 

Then another peak, a third, a fourth, then a whole line of 
them popped suddenly in the sky, at least 150 miles away, 
trending laterally across our path; and the same shimmering 
light played underneath. Could they be—why, surely they 
must be—the mountains between the range that Amundsen 
saw on his polar journey (Crown Prince Olav) and those 
which Scott and Shackleton saw from Beardmore Glacier. 

For the first time in history the entire sweep of this ma- 
jestic mass which buttresses the polar plateau was visible to 
human eyes. Smith gradually lifted the plane to 2000 tee 
and the beauty and the extent of this range were more fully 
shown. 


Fold upon fold, peak upon peak, the range rimmed the 
polar plateau, bending in a broad sweeping curve to the east. 
I studied them through my glasses. Some black rock showed, 


if 


| THE BASE-LAYING FLIGHT 313 


_a charred and weathered black which gave the peaks an air of 

ageless sturdiness. Here and there the blue-white stream of 
a glacier cut through the ebony; and one glacier, larger and 
‚ more beautiful than the rest, which could be seen almost at 
the limit of vision, I took to be Beardmore Glacier, up 
which the parties of Scott and Shackleton had climbed, with 
infinite patience and pain, in search of a highway to the Pole. 
But of course I could not be sure; it is always difficult to 
recognize from the surface a mountain according to written 
description; but from the air it is well-nigh impossible. 

Slowly, now, the Queen Maud Range came into view: first 
a few lone peaks dancing above the cylinder heads in the arc 
of the propeller; then dark shoulders of rock draped with 
snow ; then, finally, a solid mass of mountains cut and riven 
by glacial streams. Here, indeed, was what we had come 
so far to see. 

Spread out on the navigation table were Amundsen’s 
charts, a number of photographs ripped from his book, and 
scribbled notes taken from his descriptions. 

Here was a subject which de Ganahl, one of the expedition’s 
navigators, and I had discussed exhaustively on many occa- 
sions. Would it be possible to recognize from She air the moun- 
tains which Amundsen had seen and described according to 
their characteristics as seen from the ground? Amundsen had 
repeatedly confessed that under different conditions of vis- 
ibility he failed-to recognize mountains which he believed Pe 
knew well. It was absolutely necessary that I know exactly 
where we were when we prepared to land for the base. Thus 
far I had recognized nothing, but I had confidence, however, in 
the sun compass and drift indicator. I knew that we were 
flying in a straight line south. 

I searched first of all for Mt. Fridtjof Nansen—‘15,000 
ee"... a blue-black look . . . a mighty hood of ice that 
raised its shining top . . . the immense Mount Nansen”? and 
then for its eminent companion, Don Pedro Christophersen 
. . . “farther to the east . . . more covered with snow . . . 
but the long, gabled summit was to a great extent pace 


1 Amundsen, “The South Pole,” ii, p. 45. 
3 Ibid, y, 44. 
3 Ibid, ii, 3o. 


314 LITTLE AMERICA 


and for Axel Heiberg Glacier . . . “that rose in terraces along 
their sides . . . fearfully broken and disturbed" . . . the great 
main ice field . . . stretching right up from the Barrier be- 


tween the lofty mountains running east and west.” 


But I recognized nothing. We were heading for a glacier 
which I took to be Axel Heiberg because I had confidence in Al- 
bert Bumstead’s sun compass. There was a great mountain mass 
ahead, a trifle to the starboard bow, and there was an even 
larger mass to the right of it. There were huge mountains on 
the port bow too. At the foot of these high mountains were 
rows of even, pyramidal, black foothills like Arab tents struck 
at their feet. 

But another mountain had shouldered its mass in sturdy 
prominence against the rest, a stately, glittering cone. Could 
this be Ole Engelstads? I studied Amundsen’s description 
of it. “. . .Ole Engelstad’s a great snow cone rising in the 
air to 19,000 feet?” . . . Mount Wilhelm Christophersen and 
Mount Ole Engelstad formed the end of Axel Heiberg Glacier, 
“two beehived-shaped summits, entirely covered with snow.“ 
No, this peak did not fall into that description. It must be— 
I hastily gi ea the photographs, refreshing my mind with 
detail in them as we advanced steadily toward the range. 

A queer thing happened as we approached. The cone of 
the mysterious mountain gradually separated itself from the 
mountain mass on the port bow and the shape of the moun- 
tain changed before our eyes. It had ceased to be a cone. From 
the northern peak a ridge ran far back, to the south, and the 
effect then was that of a tented arch. I saw, at the moment, 
a definite structural similarity with the picture of a mountain 
on my table—ah, Ruth Gade.” It was a gorgeous mass, rising 
14,000 to 15,000 feet. 

Here was one thing on which to hang our position. There 
could be no doubt that the photograph I held in my hand and 
the one I was looking at were the same. From it I worked 
to locate the other mountains. The big mountain mass on the 
starboard bow must be the great Nansen. But wonders, there 
was an even greater mass to the right of Nansen, seen in its 


* Amundsen “The South Pole,” ii, 44. * Ibid, ii, 47. 
*Ibid, i, The First Account, xiii. 
‘Ibid, ii, 54. "Thal. ii, 3o 


THE BASE-LAYING FLIGHT 315 


‚ length, perhaps for the first time. I concluded that Don Pedro 
Christophersen and Ole Engelstad must be hidden behind Nan- 
sen. Axel Heiberg Glacier was ahead and Liv’s Glacier to the 
right. Good! Now we knew where we were. 

It seems almost absurd, as I look back upon it, to have 
been standing thus, staring one moment at a far-flung shield 
of snow-draped rock, and the next at a few words and photo- 
graphs, striving to put them together. If ever I saw the inade- 
quacies of words I did then. Cones, summits, peaks, flanks, 
ridges, turrets—scramble them together, add a dash or two of 
adjectives, and one has, at best, an approximation. Here we 
had the thing before us, in all its wonderful complexity. Even 
photographs were misleading; for with every mile of our ad- 
vance the shapes and attitudes of the mountains changed and 
became almost irrecognizable. 

It was then past two o’clock. 

Ever since we had passed the crevasses, I had searched for 
signs of Carmen Land and the mountain range which Amund- 
sen believed connected Carmen Land to King Edward VII 
Land and South Victoria Land." We not only failed to see 
the “two lofty white summits” or the “appearance of land” 
to the southeast “in about 82°,”? which he reported on the re- 
turn journey from the Pole, but we had not yet caught sight 
of the chain of mountains which he first saw at 84°,3 op the 
way in, and later as he stood halfway up the mountains and 
paused, before he renewed the ascent, for a backward glance at 
the Barrier.* 

Of this fascinating area not a trace had yet appeared. 

This was the more surprising as we were approximately 
over Amundsen’s route and had naturally a more extensive 
field of vision. 

New personalities emerged in the mountains ahead of us. 
To the left of Ruth Gade two snow-swathed peaks, of almost 
exactly the same shape, began to stand out from the rest. 
A conservative estimate put their heights at from 10,000 to 
14,000 feet. Behind these the highest peak, curved to the south- 
east and the foothills continued endlessly to the eastward. Here 
and there I could see the blue-white glint of glaciers against 


1 Amundsen, “The South Pole,” i, “The First Account,” xviii. 
2 Gp3d, ii, 170-171. ° Tya, ii, 31. + Ibid, ii, 45. 


316 LITTLE AMERICA 


the soft, velvet-black of exposed rock. And once or twice I 
was quite sure that I saw, behind the tops of the glacier, the 
white floor of the plateau. But of that I could not be certain. 
It was quite likely, I warned myself, that the imagination 
conjured up what the eye was most eager to see. 

The colossal mass to the right of Nansen was unlike any- 
thing that Amundsen described. It was easily the most im- 
pressive mountain of the lot. It did not have Nansen’s chill 
sculptured profile. This was consolidated mass, with the 
frowning ramparts of a fortress. It was at least 20 miles in 
length." 

To the right, the peaks and spurs of Crown Prince Olav 
Mountains continued to South Victoria Land. Behind the 
first outposts I had seen a second range, with peaks higher 
and more superb than those in front. 

Smith edged slightly toward the western portal of Axel 
Heiberg Glacier, where we planned to make the base. The 
Barrier underneath became more rolling, its level stretch 
giving way to a series of swelling undulations. 

We drew within a few miles of Nansen’s approaches, and 
saw that the surface, in the vicinity of Axel Heiberg Glacier, 
did not appear as favorable for landing. We headed to the 
westward and found, 15 miles or so in that direction, deep, 
fan-shaped crevasses, which were from 1o to 50 feet from 
edge to edge and partly drifted, marring the surface of the 
Barrier. The area was impossible for a landing. We kept 
these crevasses to the westward and flew south for a few 
minutes. The eastern portal of Liv’s Glacier was several 
miles to the west. 

Anxiously we studied the surface. It was not at all 
promising. Everywhere the Barrier was scored with the 
wave-like formations of sastrugi, and these, for the most 
part, appeared to be so high and rough as to forbid the at- 
tempting of a landing. However, several miles north of 
Nansen’s foothills, the western peaks of which served as the 
eastern portal to Liv’s Glacier, there was a pool of fairly level 
snow: there we decided to lay the base. 


We dropped lower. I let go a smoke bomb to get the 


` This mountain was named Fisher Mountain, after the Fisher brothers 
of Detroit. 


THE BASE-LAYING FLIGHT auy 


, wind direction, and its column leaned slightly on a gentle 
easterly. Then we dropped four bombs in line, as a means 
of determining our distance above the snow. As we turned 
apa came into She wind, I had a fair view of Liv’s Glacier. 
Amundsen had wondered what this glacier was like. The 
main channel, which was astonishingly wide, curved behind 
Nansen’s foothills and rose, in a series of escalated ice Tals, 
some of which were at least 200 feet in height, to a great 
elevation. Far up it seemed to bend slightly to the west, dis- 
appearing behind the arm of Nansen and the bulking shoulder 
of Fisher Mountain. 

The moment which we had looked forward to with ap- 
prehension was at hand. Everything depended upon this 
landing, and Dean Smith carried a heavy burden on his 
shoulders. When such moments come, the time for worry 
is passed. One feels calm, calmer than when planning for 
such a critical project. We had gone as far as mere plan- 
ning could carry us, and the result rested with Fate. There 
was no thought of physical danger. We were oppressed only 
by the fear that if things went wrong now the whole expedi- 
tion would suffer. 

I had supreme confidence in Smith. He brought the plane 
down with rare caution. The surface was rough, and I was 
more than thankful that the new skis were long and wide. 
Hay they been narrower and shorter, we might easily have 
stubbed or smashed them on the razor-backed sastrugi which 
traversed even the less disturbed spaces. 

Just before the skis hit, Smith nosed the plane into a 
power stall. We landed at a speed of about 50 miles per hour 
and the Ford was severely tested on the rough, very hard 
snow before it came to a stop. Smith’s landing was perfect. 
We had surmounted the first big obstacle between us and the 
Pole. 

Smith remained in the cockpit, carefully nursing the 
engines, while June, McKinley and I prepared to build the 
depot. I paused long enough to take several sights of the 
stn, which gave us a longitude line on the chart and indicated 
that we were about where we thought we were. That done, 
I pitched in and helped the others unload. | | 

Building the depot took very little time. We simply piled 


318 LITTLE AMERICA 


the cans of fuel and oil and the bags of food in a high mass. 
The food, however, we covered with snow blocks. The gaso- 
line stove for which the Geological Party had asked was set 
on top of the mound, which was several feet above our heads. 
We finished with some satisfaction at this southernmost base 
in the world. I named it after Josephine Ford—the same 
name which was given to the North Pole plane. 

“Well, that’s done,” June said. “Boy, what scenery! 

To the north the Barrier invaded the horizon. The rolling 
troughs and crests which seemed none too conspicuous from 
the air were immense. Nansen’s group of foothills had be- 
come full-fledged mountains, which effectively shut off Nan- 
sen from view. 

How much more—and yet how very much less—the sur- 
face traveller sees. And how different the point of view. 

The area in the vicinity of the base was heavily scored 
with sastrugi. Those nearby which we examined were quite 
deep and firm, and curved up to a sharp icy overhang. Quite 
plainly they showed that the prevailing easterly winds in this 
area were severe at times. There was, to our surprise, little 
evidence of recent movement in the ice in the immediate 
vicinity except where a few glaciers debouched from the moun- 
tains. Farther to the west, where Liv’s discharging stream, 
freighted with millions of tons of ice pouring from the 
plateau, met the Barrier we saw a series of huge crevasses 
which ran in parallel cracks more or less to the northeast. ` 
These were partly drifted over. 

The engines purred constantly. Smith, who was anxious 
about fuel consumption, slid back one of the windows in the 
cockpit and yelled: “We’d better not hang around here too 
long.” 

We hustled into the cabin, and rose in a long glide and 
headed east. With the first phase of flight operations success- 
fully accomplished, I was eager to make a thorough investi- 
gation of Carmen Land. It was my intention to fly at least 
100 miles to She east. McKinley’s camera went into action 
again, mapping the face of the Queen Maud Range as we 
flew parallel to it. 

The main structure of Queen Maud, we saw, trended to 
the southeast, and presently we saw the same smaller range 


„› 


THE BASE-LAYING FLIGHT 319 


me had seen before, which extended indefinitely to the east- 
ward.? 

The Ford had risen to an altitude of 3,000 feet and we 
had visibility to the east for at least 50 miles. Again I 
looked for Carmen Land, but in vain. I could see only the 
Barrier rolling endlessly to the east. A great pressure ridge 
or perhaps a mirage may have misled Amundsen into believing 
that land was there. So, from a geographical point of view, 
the base-laying flight had great significance in that we were 
now able definitely to extend the known limits of the Barrier 
at least 100 miles to the east. But I did not want to announce 
this until we had made still further investigation. 

At this moment, as we stood again on the threshold of 
discovery, June, who had been sounding the fuel tanks, moved 
down the cabin and told me, with a grave face, that the fuel 
supply was dangerously low. 

I shouted: “How can that be! Surely we must have gas 
for nearly seven hours’ flying.” 

June took off his glove and raised four fingers, “Very 
heavy consumption. Don’t know why.” 

When we were about an hour out from Little America 
June had discovered a fairly rapid leak near the hand fuel 
pump underneath the pilot seat. He had plugged this with 
chewing gum and then dammed it with heavy tape. At the 
time, we believed it had stopped the flow. 

There was nothing to do but turn back at once. We 
should have to run for it, as it was. Smith turned the plane, 
and as it wheeled I stared up the valley of a steep mountain 
glacier which debouched from Nansen’s flank. Far up, over 
a saddle where Nansen appeared to merge with a second mass 
of foothills, I caught sight, for a moment, of the blue-white 
flooring of Axel Heiberg. From it a mighty ice fall descended 
to the mountain glacier. 

Studying it, I was moved to wonder if we could hurl our 
heavily loaded plane over its pass, which we could not see. 
I looked at it anxiously, and wished that I might be able to 
see what lay hidden in the heights. 

We swung over Josephine Ford cache, turned north and 
I laid a straight course for Little America. There could be 


1These were named the Charles Y. Bob Mountains. 


320 LITTLE AMERICA 


no following of the southern trail on the return trip. With 
a diminishing fuel supply, a straight line recommended itself 
overwhelmingly. We should depend wholly upon the drift 
indicator, the sun compass (and astronomy if necessary) to 
get us back. Fortunately the weather continued excellent, the 
sun was visible and as long as it was there I could get a line 
on it with the sun compass. 

I glanced for a last time at Liv’s Glacier, and the idea 
occurred that it might offer better passage over the “Hump” 
than Axel Heiberg. 

Far to the west a tracery of cloud crept over the highest 
peaks. 

We flew now at an altitude of about 2,000 feet, with the 
engines turning over at the most economical revolutions, while 
Smith endeavored to “lean” the mixture as much as possible. 

I studied the eastern horizon with my glasses. Still no 
signs of Carmen Land. 

I sent Smith a message: “We will pick up the trail just 
north of the crevasses.” 

We were over the crevasses shortly before 7 :00 o’clock, and 
sure enough at approximately the point at which the calculations 
indicated we sighted the trail. We were then about 150 
miles from Little America. 

About fifty miles on, the engines began to miss. Directly 
ahead was an area which Thorne and de Ganahl, both of them 
flyers, had reported, on their return from their dog team 
journeys, was impossible for landing. It was furrowed with 
sastrugi, and we could see that the surface was still very 
rough. 

Smith worked the throttles anxiously, trying to restore 
the engines to their former fluency, but to no avail. AP 
three stopped at once. June looked up from the main gas 
tank. “No gas,” he yelled in the sudden quiet that followed 
the cessation of the engines. 

Smith brought the plane down in a superb manner, squeez- 
ing the last inch of altitude from the glide. We barely crept 
over the edge of the worst area and landed with a bump. 
Nevertheless everything held. Luck and a fine piece of work 
by Smith saw us through. 

It was then 7:29 o’clock. 


"C ZI „29 LV] py 3ya3vydyano ChHI, 


o 


b pu = "M shchi pshshch tety o ee i DE Bp OTU 3 Û 
CLUN ureydeg 4q o3ocha) 


AK 


THE BASE-LAYING FLIGHT 321 


The moment the plane stopped, all hands scrambled out, 
snatching empty cans from the racks in the fuselage and made 
ready to drain the oil from the engines. We pulled out the 
plugs and caught the warm oil as it fell. A goodly percentage 
of it went into the cans, but a considerable amount fell on 
us. In a very short time we were reeking with oil and un- 
questionably the dirtiest persons within thousands of miles. 
The oil congealed on our clothes and we were very uncom- 
fortable. 

June assembled the emergency radio set and tried to send 
an S.O.S. to the camp, but for some reason, which we were 
unable to determine at the time, he could not raise the operator. 

We then set up a tent not far from the plane, and tried to 
get some rest. It had been a busy day. But we could not 
remain still for long, for we were greatly concerned as to the 
safety of the plane. If a blizzard should come before we 
could get in touch with the camp, we might lose it. The 
weather, however, remained perfectly clear and calm. 

About 11-o’clock, when we were on the verge of giving 
up the hope of establishing communication with the camp, 
and when McKinley’s arm was abou: used up in cranking 
the hand generator, we heard the sound of an airplane. It 
was the Fairchild, with Balchen and Petersen. It made an 
extremely rough landing and taxied alongside. Balchen was 
piloting and Petersen was radio operator. To our delight 
Balchen reported that he had too gallons of fuel aboard. 

“When we heard the transmitter stop,” Balchen said, "me 
knew you had come down and figured you were about too 
miles out. Haines waited to hear from you by radio, and 
then decided to send the Fairchild out. Lack of gas, we 
decided, brought you down.” 

Our joy at seeing Balchen and Petersen was equalled only 
by our respect for Haines’ good judgment. 

This incident illustrates the value of radio. Had Balchen 
not known our position, searching for us in that vast expanse 
of snow would have been as hard as trying to find the 
proverbial needle. The radio men, at Little America, who had 
been listening in on the flight, heard the engines stop. Know- 
ing the rate of speed at which we were flying, Balchen was 
able to figure out our approximate latitude; and knowing that 


322 LITTLE AMERICA 


we had been following the trail, he knew our longitude. For a 
second time, our rescue plans functioned smoothly. 

Balchen and Petersen immediately unloaded the fuel cans 
and we dumped them into the Ford’s wing tank. Then the 
Fairchild took off for Little America, expecting us to follow. 

When we began to figure out the high fuel consumption, 
we realized that we had been a bit hasty in promising to 
follow. Not knowing exactly the cause of this excessive 
consumption we were afraid that the 100 gallons would not 
be sufficient to carry us back to base. Another forced landing 
might prove disastrous. We decided, therefore, to fly two- 
thirds of the distance to the base, select a good place to land 
and there await the arrival of more gas. 

It had turned colder and we had a difficult time getting 
the engines started. We heated them first with the blow 
torch and then the three of us threw our weight on the long 
crank which turns the inertia starter. We finally managed to 
get one engine going but were then so fatigued we were 
almost reluctant to tackle the second. When we finished 
cranking and thrust home the pin which engages the engine, 
instead of the whine of high speed revolutions which we 
waited to hear, we heard instead a blank silence. We tried 
again, and yet again, but without success. The “booster” had 
frozen solid and we were guests of the Barrier for the night. 
We stopped the first engine and tried to renew radio com- 
munication with the camp. 

McKinley crawled into the fuselage and went to sleep. 
We found him sprawled across a four-inch upright, sleeping 
as soundly as if he was in a feather bed. Smith served a 
supper of cocoa and biscuits, the predominant taste of which 
was oil, and we arranged watches for the night. 

For a time we were baffled as to the cause of the excessive 
consumption. It did not seem possible that the small leak 
near the fuel pump could have caused it alone. It was finally 
decided that the jets were still too large. 

June worked on the radio set all night, having finally 
taken down the transmitter in an attempt to locate the trouble. 
He found a rupture in the high tension lead in the hand gen- 
erator. Smith, who is a capable operator, relieved him, 


THE BASE-LAYING FLIGHT 323 


and June finally crawled into his oily sleeping bag. My bag 
I stretched on the snow, and slept fairly well. 

We were still waiting at 7 o’clock the next evening. Not 
long afterwards June made contact with the base. I sent a 
message to Bill Haines, asking him to send out the Fairchild 
with more fuel and another man to help us crank the engine. 
Haines replied instantly that the Fairchild had left some time 
ago, with more gas and oil, and should reach us very soon. 
Bill thought of everything. A moment later June heard the 
transmitter of the Fairchild and we established communica- 
tion. Balchen was piloting and Petersen was radio man. 

A few moments later Balchen landed safely. We bor- 
rowed the booster from the Fairchild, got the three motors 
started in jig time and took off. At 2,000 feet we met a 
walloping 30-mile tail wind and rode it to Little America, 
swinging above the wireless towers a few minutes before mid- 
night. The Ross Sea, to the north and east, was choked with 
drift ice. 

An hour later Balchen returned in the Fairchild, and the 
incident, which had been full of potential dangers, was closed. 

The mechanics took over the Ford, and we turned in. We 
were ready, then, to tackle the polar flight. 

Meanwhile the Geological Party, burdened down by heavy 
loads, was making heavy going of it to the mountains. 


Saturday 
November 23rd 


The mechanics have made the necessary engine adjust- 
ments on the Ford, and it is ready to go. 

All gear is ready. We are waiting now for the Geolog- 
ical Party to reach the mountains and a favorable weather 
report from Gould. 

The Geological Party reached Depot No. 5 tonight. 


Sunday 
November 24th 


McKinley’s photographs of the Queen Maud Range and 
the mountains to the westward are excellent. I have notified 
Gould by radio that I shall drop him a batch of these photo- 


324 LITTLE AMERICA 


graphs when we pass over him on the way to the Pole. They 
will give him a much clearer idea of the area than he can get 
from the surface. At least, it may simplify his geological 


work. 


Monday 
November 25th 


Sky partly overcast, temperature as high as 12° today. 
The wind is a gentle southwesterly. 

The Geological Party has the mountains in sight. Gould 
reports they put down Depot No. 6 this morning and are 
pushing ahead. He reports also that they have had no sun 
for three days. 

The sun is absolutely necessary on the polar flight, not 
only from the point of view of navigation but also of survey 
photography. 

We must wait. 


Tuesday 
November 26th 


Still cloudy here. 

Gould reported at b A.M. that “a heavy cloud bank to 
the south completely hides the mountains.” 

So we must defer the start. We cannot risk an assault 
on the “Hump” unless the air is absolutely clear. It will be 
a close squeeze as it is, just with the heavy load, without the 
added danger of colliding with an unseen mountain peak. 

For She toooshch time I have calculated expectancy and 
‘performance. We can do it by the skin of our teeth. 

The total weight of the Ford, including personnel, is nearly 
15,000 pounds. 


Wednesday 
November 27th 


This execrable cloudiness continues. The temperature was 6° 
below this morning but has since risen above zero. The wind 
is ESE. A 30 mile wind and heavy drift were reported by 
Gould this morning. 

We have asked the Geological Party to stand by until 
I P.M. for a radio schedule to advise us on weather. 


THE BASE-LAYING FLIGHT 325 


Later 


Gould radioed at 1 o’clock that the weather at the foot 
of the mountains is “excellent,” with a five mile wind from 
the southeast, and a few thin clouds above the mountain 
peaks. 

It looks good. 


Midnight 

In its 10 o’clock p.m. report the Geological Party says 
the weather continues unchanged—‘excellent.” 

Haines is making his charts. He believes that within 
another ten or fifteen hours we shall have the weather we 
want. 

It would be asking too much to demand perfect weather 
throughout the flight. A south wind, for example, which 
generally brings clear skies, must of necessity be a head wind 
on the outward trip, when the Ford will be carrying its 
heaviest loads. But a north wind, which might provide a 
very helpful boost, unfortunately brings as a rule clouds 
formed by the condensation of the warmer air from the water 
as it strikes the Barrier. 

As I have done on equally critical occasions in the past, 
I shall have implicit confidence in Bill Haines. He knows 
exactly what we need, and will not give the word until con- 
ditions are adequate. 


CHAPTER XIV 
FLIGHT TO THE SOUTH POLE 


THANKSGIVING Day, November 25th, gave us what we 
wanted, At noon the Geological Party radioed a final weather 
report: “Unchanged. Perfect visibility. No clouds any- 
where.” Harrison finished with his balloon runs, Haines 
with his weather charts. The sky was still somewhat over- 
cast, and the surface wind from the east-southeast. Haines 
came into the library, his face very grave and determined. 
Dear old Bill, he always takes his responsibilities seriously. 
Together we went out for a walk and a last look at the 
weather. What he said exactly I have forgotten, but it was 
in effect: “If you don’t go now you may never have another 
chance as good as this.” And that was that. 

There were a few things to be done. Every possible 
thing that could happen and some that could not possibly 
happen we had attempted to anticipate and prepare for. First, 
I delivered to Haines, who would be in charge of the camp 
during our absence and until the return of Gould, a set of 
instructions suggesting his procedure in case we should fail. 
It was, of course, necessary to anticipate this contingency. 
There were, besides, a number of sealed instructions, to be 
opened only if no word came from us within a fixed period. 
These provided for the organization of a relief expedition, 
the allocation of responsibility, the return of part of the 
expedition to the United States and the messages which a 
thoughtful man must leave behind before undertaking such 
a flight. These last I gave to Lofgren, who had served the 
expedition faithfully and than whom there is no squarer or 
truer man. 

The mechanics, Bubier, Roth and Demas, went over the 
plane for the last time, testing everything with scrupulous 
care. A line of men passed five-gallon cans of gasoline to 

326 


FLIGHT TO THE SOUTH POLE 327 


several men standing on the wing, who poured them into the 
wing tanks. Another line fed the stream of gear which 
flowed into the plane. Black weighed each thing before pass- 
ing it on to McKinley and June, who were stowing the stuff 
in the cabin. Hanson went over the radio equipment. With 
de Ganahl I made a careful check of the sextant and the 
watches and chronometers, which were among the last things 
put aboard. For days de Capa and I had nursed the 
chronometers, checking them against the time tick which was 
broadcast every night from the United States. We knew 
their exact loss or gain. We had to know. An error in time 
would put the Bumstead sun compass off and our geographical 
position as well. 

No thoroughbred went into a race more carefully, 
scrupulously groomed than was the Floyd Bennett before the 
polar flight. Responsibility for its performance rested with 
no single man. It lay on the shoulders of the whole camp. 
It was a sobering responsibility, and I think that every man 
felt it in his heart. 

We were done with these details shortly after three o’clock. 
At the last moment we decided to take aboard an additional 
too gallons of gasoline. There was no telling what kind 
of winds we would meet. If head winds, then the extra 
quantity of fuel would be invaluable. If not, we could dump 
it overboard before we reached the “Hump.” 

The total weight was approximately 15,000 pounds. 

Haines came up with a final report on the weather. “A 
twenty-mile wind from the south at 2,000 feet.” It meant 
clear skies to the south. I went into my office and picked 
up a flag weighted with a stone from Floyd Bennett’s grave. 
It seemed fitting that something connected with the spirit of 
this noble friend who stood with me over the North Pole, 
on May 9, 1926, should rest as long as stone endures at the 
bottom of the world. 

There were handshakes all around, and at 3:29 o’clock we 
were off. The skis were in the air after a run of 30 seconds 
—an excellent take-off. I was greatly relieved. A calm 
expectation took hold of my mind. Having started, we were 
certainly going to get somewhere. 

There was a flashing glimpse of the men clustered near 
the runway—those splendid fellows whose willing help and 


328 LITTLE AMERICA 


indestructible spirit have never faltered, no, not once—and 
we faced the south. 

The moment the Ford leveled off the impalpable haze 
with which we had contended so often confused the vision, 
and we lost several precious minutes before we found the trail. 
But if Haines’ predictions were correct, this would not last 
for long. 

Our course was laid along the meridian of the trail, which 
at that point was 143° 45’ W. Although the trail did not 
always follow that meridian, it would bring us finally to 
Axel Heiberg Glacier. 

The sky began to clear, under the sweeping movements 
of a southeasterly wind, and presently blue sky showed ahead. 
Haines was right, as always. Slowly gaining altitude, we 
passed 20 Mile Depot, then 44 Mile Depot. 

From time to time we lost the trail, as our altitude changed 
or our distance from it varied slightly. But invariably by 
steering a straight course with the Bumstead sun compass 
we picked it up again. 

Presently the northern edge of the crevasses was under- 
neath. The trail then followed meridian 163° 42’ W. The 
wind was still from the east and it was necessary to nose the 
plane 10° to the left of the course, to make good a straight 
course to the south. Had there. been any one below to see, 
he must have been surprised at the sight of a plane headed 
well to the east but flying steadily to the south. With this 
diagonal push tending to press us from our course it was 
necessary to check the course frequently with the drift 
indicator. 

Had you been there to glance over the cabin of this modern 
machine which has so revolutionized polar travel, I think 
you would have been impressed most of all—perhaps first of 
all—with the profusion of gear in the cabin. There was a 
small sledge, rolled masses of sleeping bags, bulky food sacks, 
two pressure gasoline stoves, rows of cans of gasoline packed 
about the main tank forward, funnels for draining gasoline 
and oil from the engine, mounds of clothing, tents and so 
on, ad infinitum. There was scarcely room in which to move. 

June had his radio in the after bulkhead on the port side. 
From time to time he flashed reports on our progress to the 
base. From the ear phones strapped to his helmet ran long 


FLIGHT TO THE SOUTH POLE 329 


cords, so that he might move freely about the cabin without 
being obliged to take them off. His duties were varied and 
important. He had to attend to the motion picture camera, 
the radio and the complicated valves of the six gasoline tanks. 
Every now and then he relieved Balchen at the wheel, or 
helped him to follow the elusive trail. 

McKinley had his mapping camera ready to go into action 
either on port or starboard side. It was for him and the 
camera he so sedulously served that the flight was made. 
The mapping of the corridor between Little America and the 
South Pole was one of the major objectives of the expedition. 

Balchen was forward, bulking large in the narrow com- 
partment, his massive hands on the wheel, now appraising 
the engines with a critical eye, now the dozen flickering fingers 
on the dials on the instrument board. Balchen was in his 
element. His calm fine face bespoke his confidence and sure- 
ness. He was anticipating the struggle at the “Hump” almost 
with eagerness. 

It was quite warm forward, behind the engines. But a 
cold wind swept aft through the cabin, causing one to be 
thankful for the protection of heavy clothes. When the 
skies cleared, the cabin was flooded with a golden light. The 
sound of the engines and propellers filled it. One had to 
shout to make oneself heard. From the navigation table aft, 
where my charts were spread out, a trolley ran to the control 
cabin. Over it I shot to Balchen the necessary messages and 
courses. On receiving them, he turned and smiled his under- 
standing. 

That, briefly, is the picture, and a startling one it makes 
in contrast with that of Amundsen’s party which had pressed 
along this same course eighteen years before. A wing, pistons 
and flashing propellers had taken the place of runners, dogs and 
legs. Amundsen was delighted to make 25 miles per day. 
We had to average 90 miles per hour to accomplish our 
mission. We had the advantages of swiftness and comfort, 
but we had as well an enlarged fallibility. A flaw in a piece 
of steel, a bit of dirt in the fuel lines or carburetor jets, a 
few hours of strong head winds, fog or storm—these things, 
remotely beyond our control, could destroy our carefully laid 
plans and nullify our most determined efforts. i 

Still, it was not these things that entered our minds. 


330 LITTLE AMERICA 


Rather it was the thought of the “Hump,” and how we should 
fare with it. 

Soon after passing the crevasses we picked up again the 
vast escarpment to the right. More clearly than before we 
saw the white-blue streams of many glaciers discharging into 
the Barrier, and several of the inner and higher snow-clad 
peaks glistened so brightly in the sun as to seem like vol- 
canoes in eruption. 

Our altitude was then about 1500 feet. 

Now the Queen Maud Range loomed ahead. I searched 
again for the “appearance of land” to the east. Still the roll- 
ing Barrier—nothing else. 

The quartering wind from the southeast blew with fluctu- 
ating direction and velocity, imparting an angle of drift as 
high as 20° at times. 

At 8:15 o'clock we had the Geological Party in sight—a 
cluster of little beetles about two dark topped tents. Balchen 
dropped to an altitude of about 750 feet, and McKinley put 
overboard the photographs of the Queen Maud Range and 
the other things we had promised to bring. The parachute 
canopy to which they were attached fluttered open and fell in 
gentle oscillations, and we saw two or three figures rush out 
to catch it. We waved to them, and then prepared for a 
settlement of the issue at the “Hump.” 

Up to this time the engines had operated continuously at 
cruising revolutions—1580 R.P.M.’s for the big center engine, 
1600 for the smaller engines outboard. Now Balchen opened 
them full throttl—1750 R.P.M.’s for the center engine, 1700 
for the two outboard—and the Ford girded its loins for the 
long, hard, fighting pull over the “Hump.” We rose steadily. 
We were then about 60 miles north of the western portal of 
Axel Heiberg, and holding our course steadily on meridian 
163° 45’ W. with the sun compass. 

I watched the altimeters, of which there were two in the 
navigation compartment. The fingers marched with little 
jumps across the face of the 4iai--3000 feet, 3500, 4000, 
4500. The Ford had her toes in, and was climbing fast. 

Drawing nearer, we had edged 30° to the west of South, 
to bring not only Axel Heiberg but also Liv’s into view. 
This was a critical period. I was by no means certain which 


FLIGHT TO THE SOUTH POLE 331 


I should choose. I went forward and took a position behind 
Balchen. We would figure this thing out together, 

The schemes and hopes of the next few minutes were be- 
set by many probabilities. Which would it be—Axel Heiberg 
or Liv’s Glacier? 

There was this significant difference between flying and 
sledging: we could not pause long for decision og investiga- 
tion. Minutes stood for gasoline, and gasoline was precious. 
The waste of so little as half an hour of fuel in a fruitless 
experiment might well overturn the mathematical balance on 
which the success of the flight depended. The execution of 
the plan hung on the proper judgment of the route over the 
“Hump.” 

True, we had a 40 percent safety factor over fuel needs to 
the Pole and back. This, of course, was a theoretical margin. 
It was a precaution against depletion resulting from head 
winds, and its value could not be weakened by a mistake in 
judgment. In fact, head winds had already exhausted some 
of this reserve. 

Yet how well, after all, could judgment forecast the ulti- 
mate result? There were few facts on which we might base 
a wise decision. We knew, for example, that the highest 
point of the pass of Axel Heiberg Glacier which Amundsen 
reported was 10,500 feet. We would know, in a very few min- 
utes, after June had calculated the gasoline consumption, the 
weight of the plane. From that we could determine, accord- 
ing to the tables which we had worked out and were then be- 
fore me, the approximate ceiling we would have. We would 
know, too, whether or not we should be able to complete the 
flight, other conditions being favorable. 

These were the known elements. The unknown were 
burdened with equally important consequences. The struc- 
tural nature of the head of the pass was of prime importance. 
We knew from Amundsen’s descriptions and from what we 
could see with our own eyes, that the pass was surrounded by 
towering peaks on each side, extending much higher than the 
maximum altitude of the heavily loaded plane. But whether 
the pass was wide or narrow; whether it would allow us room 
to maneuver in case we could not rise above it; whether it 
would be narrow and running with a torrent of down-pressing 
wind which would dash a plane, already hovering at its peak 


332 LITTLE AMERICA 


of maximum efficiency, to the glacier floor—these were things, 
naturally, we could not possibly know until the issue was 
directly at hand. 

I stood beside Balchen, carefully studying the looming fort- 
ress, still wondering by what means we should attempt to 
carry it. With a gesture of the hand Balchen pointed to fog 
vapor rising from the black rock of the foothills which were 
Nansen’s high priests—caused no doubt by the condensation 
of warm currents of air radiated from the sun-heated rocks. 
A thin layer of cloud seemed to cap Axel Heiberg’s pass, and 
extended almost to Liv’s Glacier. But of this we were not 
certain. Perhaps it was the surface of the snow. If cloud, 
then our difficulties were at hand. Even high clouds would 
be resting on the floor of the uplifted plateau. 

There was, then, a gamble in the decision. Doubtless a 
flip of the coin would have served as well. In the end, we 
decided to choose Liv’s Glacier, the unknown pass to the right, 
which Amundsen had seen far in the distance and named after 
Dr. Nansen’s daughter. It seemed to be wider than Axel Hei- 
berg, and the pass not quite as high. 

A few minutes after nine o’clock we passed near the inter- 
mediate base, which of course we could not see. Our altitude 
was then about gooo feet. At 9:15 o’clock we had the east- 
ern portal on our left, and were ready to tackle the “Hump.” 
We had discussed the “Hump” so often, had anticipated and 
maligned it so much, that now that it was in front of us and 
waiting in the flesh—in rock-ribbed glaciated reality—we felt 
that we were meeting an old acquaintance. But we approached 
it warily, respectfully, climbing steadily all the while with 
our maximum power, to get a better view of its none too 
friendly visage. 

June, wholly unaffected by the immediate perplexities, went 
about his job of getting the plane in fighting trim. He ripped 
open the last of the fuel cans, and poured the contents into 
the main tank. The empty tins he dropped overboard, through 
the trap door. Every tin weighed two pounds; and every 
pound dropped was to our advantage. The fumes filled 
the cabin, offending one’s stomach and eyes. June ex- 
amined the gauges of the five wing tanks, then measured with 
a graduated stick the amount of fuel in the main tank. He 
jotted the figures on a pad, made a few calculations and handed 


FLIGHT TO THE SOUTH POLE 333 


me the results. Consumption had thus far averaged between 
55 and 60 gallons per hour. It had taken us longer to reach 
the mountains than we had expected, owing to head winds. 
However, the extra fuel taken aboard just before we left 
had absorbed this loss and we actually had a credit balance. 
We had, then, enough gasoline to take us to the Pole and 
back. 

With that doubt disposed of, we went at the “Hump” 
confidently. 

We were still rising, and the engines were pulling won- 
derfully well. The wind was about abeam, and, according to 
my calculations, not materially affecting the speed. 

Liv’s Glacier was before us almost in its full sweeping en- 
tirety—a Niagric torrent doomed to rigidity, with frozen 
whirlpools and waterfalls. Far ahead it bent in a wide curve 
to the west of south. About thirty-five miles away it dis- 
appeared into a vague white surface—could it be the plateau? 
We then had nearly the whole of Nansen’s foothills on the 
left. One of these formed the eastern portal of Liv’s Glacier. 
When we first saw them on the base-laying flight, they had 
seemed to be high and imposing mountains; but now they were 
obscure and small. Nansen was on the left, to the southeast, 
and filled the horizon. The marbled walls of Fisher Moun- 
tain, with its company of stalwart foothills, was on the 
right, crowding into the horizon on the southwest. The 
ice line of the glacier, where it met the Barrier, was quite dis- 
tinct; but the immense crevasses which we had seen before 
were softened and subdued by the difference in altitude, and 
now resembled the fluted surface of a washing board. 

The floor of the glacier rose sharply, in a series of ice 
falls and terraces, some of which were well above the (then) 
altitude of the plane. These glacial waterfalls, some of which 
were from 200 to 400 feet high, seemed more beautiful than 
any precipitous stream I have ever seen. Beautiful yes, but 
how rudely and with what finality they would deal with steel 
and duralumin that was fated to collide with them at 100 miles 
per hour. 

About ten miles up, the glacier was given over to terrific 
crevasses, where the weight of the flow carried it against solid 
rock. 

At this point the stream of air pouring down the pass 


334 LITTLE AMERICA 


roughened perceptibly. The great wing shivered and teetered 
as it balanced itself against the changing pressures. The wind 
from the left flowed against Fisher’s steep flanks, and the 
constant, hammering bumps made footing uncertain. But 
McKinley steadily trained his 50-pound camera on the moun- 
tains to the left. The uncertainties of load and ceiling were 
not his concern. His only concern was photographs—photo- 
graphs over which students and geographers might pore in 
the calm quiet of their studies. Had we gone down in a tail- 
spin, I am sure that McKinley would have operated his camera 
all the way down. 

The altimeters showed a height of oboo feet, but the figure 
was not necessarily exact. More likely than not, the baro- 
metric principle on which it operated was influenced by local 
changes in pressure. Nevertheless there were indications we 
were near the service ceiling of the plane. 

The roughness of the air increased and became so violent 
that we were forced to swing slightly to the left, in search of 
calmer air. This brought us over a frightfully crevassed slope 
which ran up and toward Mount Nansen. We thus escaped 
the turbulent swirl about Fisher, but the down-surging cur- 
rents here damped our climb. To the left we had the “blind” 
mountain glacier of Nansen in full view; and when we looked 
ahead we saw the plateau—a smooth, level plain of snow be- 
tween Nansen and Fisher. The pass rose up to meet it. 

In the center of the pass was a massive outcropping of 
snow-covered rock, resembling an island, which protruded 
above and separated the descending stream of ice. Perhaps 
it was a peak or the highest eminence of a ridge connecting 
Fisher and Nansen which had managed through the ages to 
hold its head above the glacial torrent pouring down from 
the plateau. But its particular structure or relationship was 
of small moment then. I watched it only with reference to 
the climb of the plane; and realized, with some disgust and 
more consternation, that the nose of the plane, in spite of the 
fact that Balchen had steepened the angle of attack, did not 
rise materially above the outcropping. We were still climbing, 
but at a rapidly diminishing rate of speed. In the rarefied 
air the heavy plane responded to the controls with marked 
sluggishness. 


It was an awesome thing, creeping (so it seemed) through 


- 


FLIGHT TO THE SOUTH POLE 335 


the narrow pass, with the black walls of Nansen and Fisher 
on either side, higher than the level of the wings, watching 
the nose of the ship bob up and down across the face of that 
lone chunk of rock. It would move up, then slide down. 
Then move up, and fall off again. For perhaps a minute or 
two we deferred the decision; but there was no escaping it. 
If we were to risk a passage through the pass, we needed 
greater maneuverability than we had at that moment. The 
pass was uncomfortably narrow. Once we entered it there 
would be no retreat. It offered no room for turn. If power 
was lost momentarily or if the air became excessively rough, 
we could only go ahead, or down. We needed power, and 
there was only one way in which to get it. 

June, anticipating the command, left the radio and put 
his hand on the dump valve of the main tank. A pressure of 
the fingers—that was all that was necessary—and in two 
minutes 600 gallons of gasoline would gush out. I signalled 
to wait. 

Balchen held to the climb to the last degree of safety. But 
it was clear to both of us that he could not hold it long 
enough. Balchen began to yell and gesticulate, and it was 
hard to catch the words in the roar of the engines echoing 
from the cliffs on either side. But the meaning was manifest. 
“Overboard—overboard—zoo pounds!” 

Which would it be—gasoline or food? 

If gasoline, I thought, we might as well stop there and 


turn back. We could never get back to She base from the 


Pole. If food, the lives of all of us would be jeopardized 
in the event of a forced landing. Was that fair to McKin- 
ley, Balchen and June? It really took only a moment to 
reach the decision. The Pole, after all, was our objective. I 
knew the character of the three men. They were not so lightly 
to be turned aside. McKinley, in fact, had already hauled 
one of the food bags to the trap door. It weighed 125 
pounds. 

‘Harold, a bag of food overboard,” I said to June. He 
signalled to McKinley. The brown bag was pushed out and 
fell, spinning, to the glacier. The improvement in the flying 
qualities of the plane was noticeable. The Floyd Bennett 
took another breath and renewed the climb. 

Now the down-currents over Nansen became stronger. 


336 LITTLE AMERICA 


The plane trembled and rose and fell, as if struck bodily. We 
veered a trifle to the right, searching for helpful rising eddies. 
The issue was still in doubt and Balchen’s irritation with 
the inexorable laws which limited our altitude waxed and 
grew profane. The head of the pass was still on a level with 
the plane’s line of flight. Balchen was flying shrewdly. He 
maintained flight at a sufficient distance below the absolute 
ceiling of the plane to retain at all times enough maneuver- 
ability to make him master of the ship. But he was hard 
pressed by circumstances; and I realized that unless the plane 
was further lightened, the final thrust might bring us peril- 
ously close to the end of our reserve. 

“More,” Bernt shouted. “Another bag.” 

McKinley shoved a second bag through the trap door, and 
this time we saw it hit the glacier, and scatter in a soundless 
explosion. Two hundred and fifty pounds of food—enough 
to feed four men for a month—lay on that lifeless waste. 

The sacrifice was the saving factor. The plane, literally, 
rose with a jump; the engines dug in and we soon showed a 
gain in altitude of from 300 to 400 feet. It was what we 
wanted. We would clear the pass with about 500 feet to 
spare. Balchen gave a shout of joy. It was just as well. 
We could dump no more food. There was nothing left to 
dump except McKinley’s camera. ` I am sure that had he been 
asked to put it overboard, he would have done so instantly; 
and I am equally sure he would have followed the precious 
instrument with his own body. 

The next few minutes dragged. We moved at a speed 
of 77 nautical miles per hour through the pass, with the black 
walls of Nansen on our left. The wing gradually lifted 
above them. The floor of the plateau stretched in a white 
immensity to the south. We were over the dreaded “Hump” 
at last. The Pole lay dead ahead over the horizon, less than 
300 miles away. It was then about 9:45 o'clock (I did poi 
note the exact time. There were other things to think about). 

Gaining the plateau, we studied the situation a moment 
and then shifted course to the southward. Nansen’s enormous 
towering ridge, lipped by the plateau, shoved its heavily 
broken sides into the sky. To the right of it Ruth Gade’s 
tented arch gradually became, as we watched, a white inverted 
porcelain bowl. A whole chain of mountains began to parade 


‘LING AYa achyayalo SINS SL] ,{LIGNNAG CAOTJ,, yani “akyla chytod HLNOS IHL 


= =e de chsh PA Shchshch a قوی ف فر‎ aa) دو کر‎ 


ر ات ي ق ee pa Da Se lac 3latu pa c‏ ر a‏ ق ر ا 


«INAH yan, AO 
CA3putmopi ureydey Aa o3ocd) 


FLIGHT TO THE SOUTH POLE B3A 


across the eastern horizon. How high they age I cannot say,’ 
but surely many of them must be in excess of 15,000 
feet, to stand so boldly above the rim of the 10,000 foot pla- 
teau. Peak on peak, ridge on ridge, draped in snow gar- 
ments which brilliantly reflected the sun, they extended in 
a solid array to the southeast. But can one really say they 
run in that direction? The lines of direction are so bent in 
this region that 150 miles farther on, even were they to con- 
tinue in the same general straight line, they must run north 
of east. This is what happens near the Pole. 

However, such preoccupations did not bother us then. 
We were on a flight of discovery, and wanted to see things 
and record them. To bring them nearer, we had soon edged 
the course slightly to the east of the southern course we 
had taken. McKinley’s camera, which had never ceased to 
operate, trained on them, taking a succession of oblique, 
overlapping mapping photographs. Far to the left I made 
out what appeared to be the largest glacier we had yet seen, 
discharging into the new range we had first observed on the 
base-laying flight. 

We laid our line of flight on She 171st meridian. 

On the right was a range, which appeared to trend to the 
south nearly to 87° and more or less parallel to and perhaps 
a little beyond the 180th meridian—a line of low-hung peaks 
standing above the swelling folds of the plateau. Now, with 
the full panorama before us, in all its appalling ruggedness 
and gothic massiveness, we had a conception of the ice age in 
its flood tide. Here was the core, the center point 
of the Antarctic ice sheet. How deep it lay under us, 
whether 1,000 feet or 8,000 feet, we could not tell. But deep 
it must be, thus to dominate nearly all but the highest peaks 
which rimmed it, like the walls of a dam. Seeking an outlet 
to relieve its incalculable pressures, it presses through the 
passes which become glacial spillways, and makes for the sea. 
The parade of the mountains, the contrast of black and white, 
the upreaching peaks and the trisulcated troughs of the 
glaciers, the plateau spreading to an illusory horizon—it was 
something never to be forgotten. 

1 These heights will be established, however, after the necessary and 
involved mathematical processes have been applied to McKinley’s photo- 
graphs. 


The plateau seemed to be falling in a slope to the south. 
Our altitude was then between 10,500 and 11,000 feet. We 
were “riding” the engines, conscious of the fact that if one 
should fail we must come down. Once the starboard engine 
did sputter a bit, and Balchen nosed down while June rushed 
to the fuel valves. But it was nothing; to conserve fuel, 
Balchen had “leaned” the mixture too much. A quick adjust- 
ment corrected the fault, and in a moment the engine took up 
its steady rhythm. Moments like this one make a pioneering 
flight anything but dull; one moment everything is lovely, 
and the next is full of forebodings. 

The drift indicator showed a variable wind from the east. 
To compensate for it, we had to point the nose of the plane 
an average of about 12° to the east, in order to steer a 
straight course for the Pole. The influence of the drift on 
the course was always a bothersome element. It had to be 
watched carefully, and any change in the angle of drift 
detected at once, so as to make good a straight course south. 
Fitted in the floor of the plane was a drift indicator which 
McKinley used in connection with his photographic work, and 
during the flight he constantly checked the drift with me. 
Whenever I noted any change in the direction or strength 
of the wind, I would steady Balchen on his course with the 
sun compass, first shaking the trolley line to attract his atten- 
tion, then waving him on to the new course. 

The basis of these calculations was the ground speed; and 
owing to the impossibility of determining the height of the 
plane above the snow, this value was not easily accessible. The 
altimeters register altitudes, only in reference to sea level. 
There is a way, however. By timing with a stop watch 
how long it takes a crevasse, sastrugi or smoke bomb to run 
the length of the drift indicator wire in the floor of the plane, 
and then turning north and passing over the object again, 
timing it a second time, it is possible by mathematics to 
get the speed. 

Consequently, I spent a great deal of time kneeling on the 
floor of the plane, sighting sastrugi whenever I detected any 
change in drift. It was by no means a comfortable position. 
The temperature had dropped steadily since we reached the 
plateau, and when I opened the trap-door a torrent of sub-zero 
atmosphere swirled in, numbing my face and hands. 


KEHSh ETE SOUTH POLE 339 


These readings showed that while the engines were cruising 
at about 100 miles per hour, the plane was actually moving 
over the snow at the rate of go statute miles per hour. 

The character of the plateau surface varied from time to 
time. There were stretches of smooth, soft snow, colonies 
of domed haycocks and arrow-headed sastrugi. To have been 
forced down in these latter areas would have been as danger- 
ous as being forced down in a rock-strewn field. From the. 
time we reached the plateau its level appeared to fall gently 
toward the Pole; the altimeter showed that the Ford was 
maintaining a fairly steady ceiling at approximately 11,000 
feet, and the plateau fell farther below. 

While the mountains on the left were still in view, I 
attempted to shoot the sun with the sextant to get its alti- 
tude. This would give us a sun line which would cut our 
line of flight and at the point of intersection tell us what the 
sun had to say about our progress. The air, however, 
was slightly rough; the powerful center engine, labor- 
ing to keep the heavy load at an altitude of two miles, 
produced a weaving in the plane; and the most patient efforts 
failed to bring the sun and the bubble together long enough 
for a dependable sight. This was bothersome, but relatively 
unimportant at the time. We were quite confident as to the 
accuracy of the dead reckoning, and hoped that conditions 
would improve in the vicinity of the Pole. 

From time to time June “spelled” Balchen at the controls ; 
and Balchen would walk back to the cabin, flexing his cramped 
muscles. There was little thought of food in any of us—a 
beef sandwich, stiff as a board, and tea and coffee from a 
thermos bottle. It was difficult to believe that in recent his- 
tory the most resolute men who had ever attempted to carry 
a remote objective, Scott and Shackleton, had plodded over this 
same plateau, a few miles each day, with hunger—fierce, un- 
relenting hunger stalking them every step of the way. 

Between 11:30 and 12:30 o’clock the mountains to the 
eastward began to disappear, gradually of course, dropping 
imperceptibly out of view, one after another. Not long after 
12:30 o'clock the whole range had retreated from vision, and 
the plateau met the horizon in an indefinite line. The moun- 
tains to the right had long since disappeared. 

At 12:38 o’clock I finally shot the sun. It hung, a ball 


340 LITTLE AMERICA 


of fire, just beyond south to the east, 21° above the horizon. 
So it was quite low, and we stared it in the eye. The sight 
gave me an approximate line of latitude, which placed us 
very near our position as calculated by dead reckon- 
ing.» That dead reckoning and astronomy should check so 
closely was very encouraging. The position line placed us at 
Lat. 89° 414’ S., or 55% miles from the pole. A short time 
later we reached an altitude of 11,000 feet. According to 
Amundsen’s records, the plateau, which had risen to 10,300 
feet, descended here to 9,600 feet. We were, therefore, about 
1400 feet above the plateau. 

So the Pole, the mysterious objective, was actually in 
sight. But I could not yet spare it so much as a glance. Chro- 
nometers, drift indicators and compasses are hard task-mas- 
ters. 

Relieved by June, Balchen came aft and reported that 
visibility was not as good as it had been. Clouds were gather- 
ing on the horizon off the port bow and a storm, Balchen 
thought, was in the air. A storm was the last thing we 
wanted to meet on the plateau on the way back. It would 
be difficult enough to pass the Queen Maud Range in bright 
sunlight; in thick weather it would be suicidal. Conditions, 
however, were merely unpromising: not really bad, simply 
not good. If worse came to worse, we decided we could 
out-race the clouds to the mountains. 

At six minutes after one o’clock, a sight of the sun put us 
a few miles ahead of our dead reckoning position. We were 
very close now. The sight was a check, but I depended more 
op the previous sight. At 1:14 o'clock, Greenwich Civil Time, 
our calculations showed that we were at the Pole. 

We turned right and flew three or four miles. Had we 
turned right just before reaching the Pole, one could say 
that we had turned westward; but having reached the Pole 
we really turned northward, because all directions at the 
South Pole are north. We now reversed our direction, which 
had been northward, and flew toward the Pole again. Our 
direction then was southward, although at right angles to 
our previous line of course, which was also southward. It 
is difficult, therefore, to speak of directions during these 
maneuvers. For example, the moment we crossed the Pole 
again after this second change of course onr direction, which 
FLIGHT TO THE SOUTH POLE 341 


had been southward, instantly became northward, although 
we were still on the same straight line. 

We continued on the same straight line of flight for 
about six miles, and this took the plane about three miles 
beyond the original line of flight we had followed from the 
mountains. Then we cut diagonally across an extension of our 
line of flight, which we hit five miles beyond the Pole. At 
1:25 o'clock we turned back—toward the Pole and Little 
America. 

It is a confusing place, this imaginary point, the South 
Pole. All time meridians converge there. A person un- 
fortunate enough to be living in ‘the vicinity would have 
difficulty in telling just what time to keep. Time is reckoned 
by the interval between two successive crossings of the sun 
over the meridian at the place at which the time is reckoned. 
As all meridians intersect at the South Pole, there is no 
particular meridian. The sun circles the sky at the same 
height above the snow horizon, and this height changes only 
an imperceptible amount every twenty-four hours. Directions, 
as we reckon them, would likewise mean nothing to this 
unfortunate creature. For unless he were travelling either 
north or south, it would be impossible for him to walk in a 
straight line and still retain the same direction. His direction 
would change noticeably every few minutes; and to keep his 
original direction he would be forced to follow a spiral course. 

A few minutes after the turn I opened the trap door and 
dropped over the calculated position of the Pole the small 
flag which was weighted with the stone from Bennett’s 
grave. Stone and flag plunged down together. The flag 
had been advanced 1,500 miles farther south than it had ever 
been before our expedition reached the Antarctic. June 
radioed the following message to Little America: “My cal- 
culations indicate that we have reached the vicinity of the 
South Pole. Flying high for a survey. Byrd.” 

The altimeters indicated our altitude as 11,000 feet. 

For a few seconds we stood over the spot where Amund- 
sen had stood, December 14, 1911; and where Scott had also 
stood, 34 days later, reading the note which Amundsen had 
left for him. In their honor, the flags of their countries were 
again carried over the Pole. There was nothing now to mark 
that scene; only a white desolation and solitude disturbed by the 


# 


342 LITTLE AMERICA 


sound of our engines. The Pole lay in the center of a limit- 
less plain. No mountains were visible. In the direction of 
Little America visibility was good, and so it was on the 
left. But to the right, which is to say to the eastward, the 
horizon was covered with clouds. If mountains lay there, 
as some geologists believe, they were concealed and we had no 
hint of them. 

And that, in brief, is all there is to tell about the South 
Pole. One gets there, and that is about all there is for the 
telling. It is the effort to get there that counts. 

We put the Pole behind us and raced for home. 

The mountains to the eastward came into view again, 
one by one. But whereas before the southernmost peaks had 
stood out clear and distinct, they were now confused by haze 
and clouds. The clouds were travelling fast, threatening to 
close in ahead of us, and if we valued our skins, it behooved 
us to beat them to the pass. 

We were then riding the 168th meridian to Axel Heiberg 
Glacier. It was my intention to return somewhat to the east- 
ward of the original course, in order to bring within range 
as much new territory as was possible. McKinley, who had 
photographed the area to the eastward on the way to the 
Pole, was then mapping the area to the westward. By that 
time his camera must have seeméd almost as heavy as the 
mountains he was photographing. But his efforts never 
slackened. When the highest mountains to the eastward 
came into view, he mapped them as well. 

Time began to crawl. It was a case of hitting the pass 
of Axel Heiberg Glacier ahead of the clouds or being sorry. 
The wind was then astern and helping us considerably. At 
first it maintained a fairly steady direction, then shifted and 
hit the Ford dead astern. Of course, its direction varied 
from time to time. Our speed increased. About two o'clock, 
seeking a still stronger wind aloft, we climbed several hundred 
feet and here found a fairly stiff following wind. With that 
boosting us, we hurried over the plateau. At three o’clock 
Balchen opened the throttles wide and a short time later we 
climbed about 400 feet higher. At this level the wind was 
even stronger. We commenced to make a speed better than 


125 miles per hour. Our altitude was between 11,500 and 
12,000 feet. 


FLIGHT TO THE SOUTH POLE 343 


About half past three o’clock Balchen’s face broke into 
a smile. Ruth Gade’s conical turret was off the starboard 
bow. There was Nansen off the port bow. Soon W. 
Christophersen came into view, a small rounded dome between 
Ruth Gade and Nansen. The charts, photographs and de- 
scriptions which I had culled from Amundsen’s book, as well 
as the photographs which McKinley had taken on the base- 
laying flight, were before me: and as each new prominence 
appeared and fell neatly into its expected place, we were 
delighted. Our return course had been straight and our 
position coincided with our dead reckoning position. The 
flight was almost done. Best of all, the pass was clear. 

We edged to the left, to bring Axel Heiberg’s corridor 
into view. Then we changed course to the right, to examine 
a depression to the right of Ruth Gade. While moving 
toward it, we noticed still another pass to the left of Ruth 
Gade, apparently the most accessible of all, and decided to 
make for that. The maneuver brought Don Pedro Chris- 
tophersen into full view. He was a good-sized fellow. But 
how very beautiful was Ruth Gade! 

A few clouds were beginning to gather in the passes to 
the right and left. We had out-stripped the main advance. 

By 3:50 o'clock we had passed over the head of the 
glacier, sinking lower all the time, and glided down the 
shattered terraces between the precipitous sides of Ruth Gade 
and Don Pedro Christophersen. The glacier we were follow- 
ing debouched into Axel Heiberg. The air in places was 
very bumpy, and the loose gear in the plane was tossed about 
rather wildly. Nansen’s noble summit showed above Don Pedro 
Christophersen, a stern but kindly spectator of the descent. 

We emerged from the glacier shortly after four o’clock. 

June finished with his calculations of the fuel supply and 
reported there was a slight margin over needs. There was 
enough, then, to make further inquiry into Carmen Land, 
so we continued to the eastward. McKinley, I decided, ought 
to photograph the area. 

We were now over the Barrier, and we could see how 
the shearing movements of the Barrier, where it pressed 
against the feet of the mountains, had resulted in very deep 
and extensive crevasses in several areas. What mighty 
pressures must be at work, to rip that tough fabric as if it 


344 LITTLE AMERICA | 


were silk. The extensions of Queen Maud Range and the 
new mountains which we had seen on the base-laying flight 
were on our right, a solid rampart extending to the south 
of east. They were almost wholly covered with snow and 
some were broken by glaciers of considerable size and beauty. 
Indeed, what is, I think, one of the most beautiful glaciers 
in the world lies about 30 miles from our mountain base. 
I saw it for the first time then and was struck with its wild 
loveliness. It was wide and curving, a glacial river, and we 
could look up into it for miles. 

The flight proved what I already knew to be true. 
Carmen Land does not exist. McKinley photographed the 
Barrier where Amundsen believed it lay, ard we then turned 
westward, looking for the base. 

Soon after we turned I became puzzled by the unfamiliar 
aspects of the mountains in the port beam. They appeared 
to be unlike any that we had seen. Yet my calculations placed 
us eastward of Ruth Gade. Could it be that we were off the 
course? Surely it did not seem possible that we could have 
gone so far astray in such a short time. I stared at the 
mountains and racked my brain. Where in the world, I asked 
myself, is Ruth Gade? All four of us conferred for a 
moment. Myt op, who evidently had not been watch- 
ing the course carefully, were unanimously of the opinion 
that the base was still farther to eastward. For a few fright- 
ful seconds I was uncertain as to the validity of my course. If 
the base were really to the east of us, then I was the world’s 
worst navigator. For my calculations showed that it was to 
the west. 

As I unrolled my charts, my eye caught on a penciled 
notation in the corner of one. It said: “Remember that the 
appearances of mountains change according to the position 
from which viewed.” Amundsen had been misled on a num- 
ber of occasions by this illusion, and my experience on the 
base-laying flight had caused me to take this warning as a 
controlling principle. The night before the start of the polar 
flight I wrote the warning on the chart. 

While I watched these strange mountains, the peaks began 
to change their shapes. This unfamiliar eminence—why, it 
was Ruth Gade in a new attitude. There was Nansen. And 
there, of course, were Nansen’s foothills. 


FLIGHT TO THE SOUTH POLE 345 


With these points established, finding the cache itself was 
a matter of a few minutes. We edged over to Liv’s Glacier, 
made several turns at lower altitudes, and finally spotted it. 
June, who had been a member of the base-laying party and 
therefore knew the character of the surface, brought the 
plane down smoothly. The skis touched the surface at 4:47 
o'clock. 

Taking the fuel aboard was quite a problem. Each can 
had to be broken open and poured, one by one, into the wing 
tanks, and we soon tired of lifting them to June, who was 
doing the pouring. It was six o’clock before we rose from 
the Barrier and headed north, on the last leg of the flight. 
By that time the out-riders of the storm clouds were creep- 
ing over the mountain rim to the east. They were too far 
away to be troublesome. 

We steered a straight course for Little America, and made 
no attempt to pick up the trail, which was to the east. But 
our course converged with the trail a few miles north of 
Little America. We flew by sun compass and drift indicator 
and made a perfect land fall. Again the sun compass had 
done its job. 

We had Little America’s radio spires in sight at ten 
o’clock. A few minutes later we were over the administra- 
tion building, swinging west to come in for a landing. A 
last survey showed that the Bay of Whales was still choked 
with ice, the northern edge of which extended almost to West 
Cape. At 10:08 o'clock, November 20, the Ford’s skis 
touched snow, and the flight was over. 


Sunday 
November 29th 


Well, it’s done. We have seen the Pole and the American 
flag has been advanced to the South Pole. McKinley, Balchen 
and June have delivered the goods. They took the Pole in their 
stride, neatly expeditiously, and undismayed. If I had searched 
the world I doubt if I could have found a better team. Theirs 
was the actual doing. But there is not a man in this camp who 
did not assist in the preparations for the flight. Whatever merit 
accrues to the accomplishment must be shared with them. 


They are splendid. 


CHAPTER XV 
EASTWARD BEYOND THE HORIZON 


Tne completion of the polar flight left the expedition as 
far as operations were concerned with only three major ob- 
jectives unachieved—(1) the geological and geographical sur- 
vey of Gould’s party, (2)—an accurate ground survey of the 
Bay of Whales, and (3)—the further investigation of the new 
land to the eastward. The first of these was on the thresh- 
old of accomplishment. Sunday, December Ist, Dr. Gould 
notified the base by radio that his party was camped at the 
foot of Liv’s Glacier, having spent the previous day in ne- 
gotiating crevasses which “made the memory of those back 
between 81° and 82° seem like playthings for children.” 
Dr. Coman and Quin Blackburn, who had had considerable 
surveying experience, had been detached to do the second. As 
for the third, we were already in preparation for an ex- 
tended flight. 

Apart from the attraction which any unknown area holds 
for an inquiring mind, the land to the eastward drew us, as it 
had drawn many before us, with a magnetism peculiar to. 
itself. It is the central mystery in a continent of mysteries. 
For many years a school of geologists and geographers has 
held the theory that the Antarctic is not one continent, but 
two; perhaps not a continent at all, but a series of epiconti- 
nental islands which, to borrow a phrase from Sir Douglas 
Mawson, may have been “overwhelmed and united by a flood 
of glacier ice and between which the sea would flow were 
the ice to melt.”t There were many bases for this supposi- 
tion. The almost identical indentations cut into the conti- 
nental structure by the arms of Weddell Sea and the Ross Sea 
are looked upon by some authorities as evidence of separation. 


*Mawson, “Problems of Polar Research,” 258, 


346 


EASTWARD BEYOND THE HORIZON 347 


‚ 13 there a low-depression channel underneath the glacier cap 
through which the sea flows between them? Geological investi- 
gations have shown certain wide dissimilarities between East 
and West Antarctica, which would seemingly support the 
assumption. There is, on the other hand, circumstantial evi- 
dence on which it is argued to the contrary. The question stood 
posed, and the answer, it was believed, might be found in the 
vast unexplored area between King Edward VII Land and 
Graham Land. 

Hence, our desire to get over there, in spite of the fact 
we had been driven back thrice by sea and twice by air. 


Monday 
December and 


Warm today, 15° above zero, with a gentle southwest 
wind. The higher temperatures are causing havoc to the old 
tunnel systems, which we no longer use. An incautious travel- 
ler who passes over them is liable to find himself dumped 
with scant ceremony into the basement. 

The Geological Party reports that it attempted to climb 
Liv’s Glacier, but was forced back by crevasses and ice falls. 
They have now decided to attempt the ascent via Axel Hei- 
berg. Today they march to the eastward. 


Tuesday 
December 3rd 


Still warm, partly cloudy. No word from the Geological 
Patty. 
Camp very quiet. 


Wednesday 
December 4th 


Real summer weather, 27° above zero. 

Gould reports that he is unable to find our mountain air- 
plane base, despite the photographs which we dropped to them 
on the polar flight. He said; “Never saw a place where dis- 
tances so deceptive. Much worse than desert.” He explained that 
the fine last day’s march to the mountains, when they covered 


348 LITTLE AMERICA 


35 (geographical) miles, was due to the fact that they thought 
the distance was only 15 miles. They are now camped at the 
foot of Axel Heiberg Glacier. 

Dr. Gould added a special news item: “Freddy Crockett’s 
appetite has now been eclipsed by those of Mike Thorne and 
Norman Vaughan. That is news.” 


Thursday 
December 5th 
Later 


I think we shall make the eastern flight tomorrow. Haines 
believes that weather conditions are improving. No announce- 
ment will be made, however, until we are absolutely certain. 
The false starts before the polar flight almost broke the heart 
of the personnel. 

Parker will be the pilot, and June and McKinley will go 
in their accustomed capacities. We will use the Floyd Bennett. 

This flight may be the most important flight of all. 


On the morning of the 5th, Haines made a series of balloon 
runs which showed a slight southerly drift up to 10,000 feet. 
The day was clear and warm, with a light southwesterly wind 
on the surface. The plane was ready, and at 10:50 o’clock in 
the morning we took off. In the tanks was fuel for 12 hours 
flying. I laid a course which would bring us about five miles 
to the north of Scott’s Nunatak. 

We climbed to an altitude of approximately 2000 feet. 

The Ross Sea was open, except for scattered pieces of pack 
and a few icebergs in the distance. During the previous weeks 
the wind had blown rather steadily from the south, and this 
no doubt had driven the pack farther north. It was a perfect 
time to send a ship through, but the City, alas, was still in New 
Zealand. 

We were surprised to note how little the shape of the Bar- 
rier had changed since our last flights. We carried, of course, 
the survey photographs which McKinley had made the previous 
summer, and what change there was, was almost imperceptible. 
For example, a V-shaped bay which I had noticed before and 
remarked would probably be gone when we returned, was still 
in position, unchanged. 


"shche": cho 
povlocyovucho olpad choa “IA ‘Ie Əy} 3shpu3ovop “soq OY} sholy UMPA achy po ‘ep epa IJL 


chom chop chnt cho diet) AHL NT 


“yato ChHI Wows maptya yani ko “LHI JHL NO adv") HINY num “chyatoyto) ChHI NMOQ OXID5YO7 


C&W ureydey Aa ooqq) 


EASTWARD BEYOND THE HORIZON 349 


| Hal Flood Bay was underneath at 11:40 o’clock. We were 

then at an altitude of 4500 feet, and visibility was approxi- 
mately 80 miles. While the horizon was not as distinct as we 
‚ had hoped for, neither was it obscure. Conditions of visibility 
were far better than on the previous flights, indeed they were 
splendid, and we went forward with keen confidence. The 
Ford was making more than too iniles per hour at cruising 
revolutions. 

A little before noon we had the Rockefellers abeam. We 
were cutting across Cape Colbeck’s hump on a Great Circle 
course. Here we observed the crevasses which Prestrud de- 
scribed, and they appeared to be very extensive and disturbed. 
South of Colbeck the continental ice sheet was very roughened 
and undulating. Far to the north the fine, glittering clarity of 
the snow’s edge met the burnished copper of the sea. The water 
was slightly ruffled, and here and there an iceberg floated sus- 
piciously near a jagged break in the Barrier, suggesting recent 
“calving.” 

Not long after we had the Rockefellers abeam we sighted 
the Matterhorn. Now it stood out perfectly, whereas before 
it had been partially masked by clouds. It was off the star- 
board bow, and made a brave and compelling sight on the snow 
pedestal on which he stood. This time we saw what we had 
not seen before—that high land lay in rolling swales about the 
Matterhorn. 

Parker continued to climb, and at 12:27 o’clock we were 
5000 feet above and about 5 miles north of Scott’s Nunatak, 
with a splendid bird’s panorama of this unknown area spread 
beneath. 

To the north the continental ice sheet ended in a most 
unusual formation of ice tongues, which licked into an outer 
band of shelf ice. From our great height it was difficult to 
believe that these out-jutting tongues rose probably 200 feet 
above sea level. Under the vast pressures exerted from the 
hinterland they had pushed out over the sea, and huge pieces 
had broken off, forming ice islands, some of which were 
grounded and others imprisoned in the layer of shelf ice which 
was anchored to the coast line. These islands were terribly cre- 


vassed and split. | 
Beyond the rim of shelf ice a consolidated mass of pack ice 


350 LITTLE AMERICA 


was pressed. The pack was much broken up and seemed to 
be held in position by the long arm of Cape Colbeck. 

We then had the whole chain of the Alexandra Mountains 
below us and to the right. They were far smaller and less ex- 
tensive than we had expected. None of them appeared to be 
more than 2000 feet high. 

We could now see into the great blank space on the chart 
which I had studied hundreds of times and wondered about. 

About 12 :40 o’clock the thing we were looking for emerged 
grudgingly from the translucent horizon—first a mountainous 
mass a few degrees to the right of our course, which at the 
moment was 55° right of north. It was a considerable dis- 
tance to the eastward. As we drew nearer other peaks loomed 
up, and there was the suggestion of a long range. It was, we 
knew, a first class discovery. 

Even the charted areas that were then ending were quite 
inaccurately placed on the map, for at this point the ice line 
continued more to the northeast than north, as shown on the 
charts. In fact, between the plane and the new land was a 
stretch of open water. A straight line course recommended 
itself at once, although it did seem a risky venture to take a 
land plane over this pack-strewn area. A forced landing could 
have had only one ending. However, to have followed the 
circuitous route along the coast line would have laken much 
too long, so we held on to the course that ttok us across 
the sea. 

As we moved out and away from the coast line we could see 
with surprising clearness how the belt of water-borne shelf 
ice was attached to the seaward-moving masses of continental 
ice. This shelf ice appeared to be a miniature barrier half 
way in size between old bay ice and barrier. The fringe was, 
for the most part, from 25 to 50 miles wide; here and there 
the ruptured rounded dome of an ice-island showed in the 
shelf ice to the right. The land ice terminated in a barrier- 
like formation, with chalk-white cliffs 200 to 250 feet high 
in places. Behind these the ice sheet rose and fell undulating 
to the east and south. Matterhorn gradually disappeared on 
our right. 

As the Ford moved farther on, we could see where the pack 
behind us was jammed in a mass of débris against the fore- 
shore of Cape Colbeck. The new ice skirting the shelf ice on 


EASTWARD BEYOND THE HORIZON 351 


„She seaward side was quite broken and shallow in places, and 
the darker shadow of the water was visible underneath it. The 
pack littered the sea like paper scraps; there were a few fairly 

i extensive floes; but for the most part the loose ice appeared 
to be granulated and fine. 

Steadily we bore away from the coast. When we were 
20 miles out, June, looking down at the open sea, turned and 
went through a series of gestures which plainly indicated 
swimming. True, there had been little enough bathing in 
Little America during the winter; but the suggestion left the 
rest of us cold. The engines sang without a break, and their 
music was the sweetest and most satisfying sound that we 
wanted to hear. 

We saw one immense floe standing out to sea, a cemented 
piece of old thick sea ice and new thin ice which had ap- 
parently separated from the main sheet at the same time. It 
was at least twenty-five miles long and ten miles wide, a very 
substantial recruit to the pack, It was badly cracked, and 
along the lines of cleavage one could see where it was begin- 
ning to disintegrate. 

There were 35 miles of open water in the direction of our 
line of flight. This we crossed. 

A few minutes after one o’clock, we reached the edge 
of the she.” ice and soon afterwards were over the 150th 
meridian, tue eastern boundary of the British claims. We 
were advancing at the rate of 100 miles per hour over an 
area which had been unseen before, unknown and unclaimed. 
Here was the romance of geographical exploration; and seeing 
this land at last, after so much hoping and trying, brought 
deep satisfaction. The mystery to the eastward was beginning 
to yield. Aviation was doing what surface craft had for many 
years been failing to do. Best of all, every foot of this area 
was being recorded precisely and in its full perspective by 
McKinley’s camera. 

The Ford’s altitude was then about 5,000 feet. Wisps 
of cloud vapor swept underneath, and their shadows were 
like dirty finger marks on the ice. 

We changed course more to the northward at 1:13 o'clock, 
to enable McKinley to keep the coast line in his survey photo- 
graphs, a most important consideration in the discovery and 


mapping of a new area. 


352 LITTLE AMERICA 


The mountain masses to the eastward had been steadily 
enlarging. Against the horizon they extended north and 
south as far as the eye could see, an irregular steel-gray 
bulwark. The nearest peak was at least 60 miles away, but 
at our altitude could be seen quite distinctly. The mountains 
were large and I could not repress a feeling of joy over the 
discovery. 

Most important of all, what I took to be the white elevated 
floor of a plateau showed behind the range. In this new 
land, then, there was perhaps a counterpart of the mighty 
plateau in South Victoria Land and about the Pole. 

The coast line now bore sharply to the eastward for 20 
or 30 miles, but its general direction was northeasterly. Our 
northerly course took us approximately parallel to the moun- 
tain range, which runs north and south, and we continued on 
it for about 60 miles, then changed course again to the east- 
ward, to bring the mountains nearer. 

McKinley’s delight was beyond words. Everything of 
which an aerial surveyor dreams were before his camera in 
one grand profusion—a new and undiscovered land, excellent 
visibility, a well marked coast line which would give him a 
fixed altitude (sea level) for scientific determination and a 
scenery unlike any other known to man. 

After we had flown to the east for a few minutes we 
saw a peak emerging from what we took to be shelf ice. It 
was a great distance off. We headed in its general direction, 
but it did not draw appreciably nearer although we flew 
towards it about 20 miles. It was too far away to be in- 
vestigated without the sacrifice of considerable time, which 
we could not give without jeopardizing the larger purposes 
of the mission. 

At 2:10 o'clock we swung to the southward and flew 
again approximately parallel to the mountains. Just as we 
made the turn, June was certain that he saw the sea to the 
northward of us turn sharply to the eastward. If it did, I 
failed to see it. The mountain range continued on to the 
northward and some of the mountains curved to the east- 
ward as far as I could see with the glasses, and that was at 
least about 70 miles. It was undoubtedly a large range. 
Though we were still a great distance from these mountains 
they stood out clearly and beautifully. The peaks of some 


`aChYLMISY yan OL LHOITY IHL NO NIAS ANVISI] yao] ky 


CHON udeg 49 o3ocha) 


‘OV chop AHL Saad ANV achchyalog AO] NI chaty NIJO 
CMON udeg 44 o3ocha) 


ce 


EASTWARD BEYOND THE HORIZON 353 


of them were surely 10,000 feet high. Bursting through this 
rampart was a superb glacier. Cold and blue, it lay between 
two gray-black walls, and in the center of the stream stood 
a high black peak. Actually, it must have been about 4000 feet. 
The glacier itself was about 15 miles across its mouth and 
it was like a great white river flowing between smooth black 
cliffs. 

After paralleling the coast line for about 60 miles, we 
steered various courses to investigate and photograph a num- 
ber of ice islands and rock islands which we thought we saw 
chi the Ross Sea. But they were too far off and we desisted. 
What they are I do not pretend to know. So many explorers 
more experienced than I have made mistakes in the claiming 
of lands that I was determined to claim discovery only of 
those things which could be and were recorded by the un- 
forgetting and unassailable memory of the camera. 

About three o’clock we turned south again. 

The surface between our line of flight and the mountain 
was very much disturbed. It advanced toward the mountains 
from the sea in a series of wave-like ridges, which were 
cracked and broken by pressure. 

Dim shapes began to loom up in the southeastward, sug- 
gestive of land. They were not unlike the pyramids of Egyp 
in the odd looming which is characteristic of Antarctic 
visibility. 

Of all the flights I have ever made, none was so full of 
excitement and profit as this one. An air of impending drama 

“foreshadowed every mile of progress. North, east, south and 
west—everything that was there was unseen and untrodden 
and unknown. It seemed to be very important, and yet one 
could not exult. Nature had worked on such a large scale 
and with such infinite power that one could only gape at her 
handiwork with open mouth and say: Hoy smoke! 

For here was the ice age in its chill flood tide. Here was 
a continent throttled and overwhelmed. Here was the life- 
less waste born of one of the greatest periods of refrigeration 
that the earth has ever known. Seeing it, one could scarcely 
believe that the Antarctic was once a warm and fertile climate, 
with its own plants and trees of respectable size. 

Here, too, in this glacial flood is a counterpart of the 
immense ebbs and flows of ice over the earth which profoundly 


354 LITTLE AMERICA 


affected mankind. “But for the Permo-Carboniferous glacia- 
tion of India, Australia, South America and Africa, with the 
accompanying cooling of the remainder of the world, gigantic 
insects might have dominated the world. But for the cooling 
of Cretaceous and Eocene times, it appears quite likely that 
mammals might yet be insignificant tribes, leading a precarious 
existence at the mercy of the Jurassic horde of reptiles. Re- 
frigeration has again and again involved extinction of 
specialized races and vivification of more generalized and 
newer types. Insects gave place to reptiles, reptiles to mam- 
mals and—to bring the history up to date—the dominance of 
man coincides remarkably with the coming of the great cool- 
ing of the Pleistocene, the effect of which upon the climates 
of the world is still apparent.” 1 
Here, too, is the receding flood of a once much greater 
flood. One could not help but speculate, with a sense of thank- 
fulness that by that time the matter will probably have no per- 
sonal interest, on what new destiny Nature has in store for the 
lowly mammal when the pendulum reaches the point of turn. 
There was great beauty here, in the way that things which 
are also terrible can be beautiful. Glancing to the right, one 
had the feeling of observing the twilight of an eternity. Over 
the water and submerged land crept huge tongues of solid 
ice and snow, ploughing into the outer fringe of shelf ice 
and accomplishing wide destruction. There were cliffs that 
must rise hundreds of feet. Once I caught sight of a cliff 
as it fell into the sea. From the great height of the plane it 
was just a small pellet falling from a toy wall. Not a sound 
penetrated through the noise of the engines. Yet thousands 
of tons must have collapsed in one frightful convulsion. To 
the right were the mountains, cold and gray, and from them 
fell, in places, ice falls which were perhaps 500 feet in height. 
The figure is arbitrary. They may have been more, or less. 
We had sighted the Matterhorn again and advanced stead- 
ily toward it, studying the mountains on our left. The farther 
we went, the more we became impressed with the rolling 
character of the land. In one place, where the surface was 
quite high, we made out a patch crossed by rippling lines; 
these were pressure ridges, no doubt covering an area per- 
haps 20 miles in length. I saw then that the mountains con- 
* Priestley and Wright, “Problems in Polar Research,” 334. 


EASTWARD BEYOND THE HORIZON 355 


tinued in an uninterrupted chain to the southward, and this 
whole enormous area definitely joined the land we had seen 
on the eastern flight. 

On our port bow we saw extraordinary lakes of open 
water, showing in velvet-black pools against the irregular 
pattern of the ice, in ice covered land. I call them lakes, but 
it is possible they were channels or inlets. Just why these 
lakes should defy freezing I could not understand. It may be 
that strong currents keep them open. Certainly it does not 
seem that they can be the result of thawing—not on a con- 
tinent where the temperature only rarely rises above the freez- 
ing point. 

One of the lakes lay to the northeastward of Matterhorn. 
We changed course so that McKinley might photograph it. 
Drawing nearer, we saw that on its northern side was a high 
snow cliff. Its southern edge was bounded by a curious ice 
or snow formation which rose and fell regularly, like waves. 
The crests of these waves must have been at least 300 feet 
high. 

A series of these pools of open water lay to the eastward. 

After passing over the lake we changed course to the west- 
ward, to bring the Matterhorn before McKinley’s camera. By 
then McKinley had photographed 200 miles of the new moun- 
tain range, and our own vision, helped by glasses, had seen 
even farther. 

The purposes of our trip, then, were realized. 

We changed course again, a few degrees to the left, to in- 
vestigate more patches of open water which lay, as near as 
I could judge, 50 miles from the open sea at the point where it 
met the shelf ice. 

Matterhorn slowly made felt its splendor. From its cone- 
like eminence a slightly less elevated ridge ran to the south- 
east, about to the 150th meridian, according to a rough esti- 
mate. 

We passed the Matterhorn to the north at 4:45 o'clock. 
To the northeast of it was a violently disturbed area. Even 
from 5000 feet the crevasses seemed monstrous. They lay 
in long, almost perfectly drawn furrows, and some of them 
must have been at least 200 feet across. Here and there the 
black depths of pits and craters showed. Scott's Nunatak was 


356 LITTLE AMERICA 


in sight, and between it and Matterhorn the surface was high 
and rolling, suggestive of land. 

In the course of the flight we had circled the nunataks of 
Alexandra Range and photographed them from all sides. 

We were then well inland, homeward bound. Presently 
the Rockefellers were in view, a scattering of peaks throwing 
long shadows. A few stratus clouds floated near them. 

Parker opened up the engines and we struck across 
familiar territory. 

At 6:20 o’clock we landed at Little America. Parker had 
made a splendid flight. 


Friday 
December bi 


The flight to the eastward was more successful than I had 
dared to hope. 

From a geographical point of view it was eminently satis- 
factory. It proved the existence of land in that area—an im- 
mense landfall. 

It extended the outline of the coast and lifted a great 
section of it from the realm of fiction. McKinley has now 
surveyed and mapped a 400 mile stretch of the Barrier line 
and coast line. ` 

It provided the new land first discovered on the flight of 
February 18th with a coastal access. 

The survey photographs which McKinley made will be 
interesting and important to glaciologists fifty and one 
hundred years from now. For they are a permanent record 
of ice conditions in 1929, and the extent of the changes which 
will undoubtedly occur during the intervening years can be 
clearly drawn. Here, again, is an example of the new pre- 
cision in modern exploration. 

The discovery of land explains, in a measure, why all at- 
tempts to penetrate this region by sea have failed. With a 
northwesterly wind, the northern extension of the coast, 
whether as an archipelago or as a solid mass, would be 
jammed with ice, which would collect and consolidate in im- 
penetrable quantities. At this time, I am inclined to lean to- 
ward the belief that there is an archipelago somewhere to the 
northward of the newly discovered land, which feeds the pack 


EASTWARD BEYOND THE HORIZON 357 


in that vicinity. This alone, it would seem, can account for 
the stupendous quantities of ice discharged. 

However, discovery is only the beginning. It merely 
brings to light a reality. It is now the job of the geologists 
to take it apart and find the inner secrets. How it would 
delight Larry Gould to make a study of that fascinating 
problem. But there is no time for it on this expedition. 

If he can cross the 150th meridian during this trip and 
enter the new land to the east of his course, it will be an 
excellent contribution. I am reluctant to suggest an extension 
of his journey, which will be long enough anyway; but I am 
sure that when he has assimilated the importance of the 
eastern flight, he will see the value of the trip and will suggest 
the extension himself. 

To the new escarpment I have given the name Edsel Ford 
Range. Mr. Ford has been a consistent supporter of my 
efforts in exploration and aviation. More than that, he is a 
dear friend. 

To the new Land I have given the name Marie Byrd Land 
after my wife, who has backed and B. 
the way, who has shouldered much of the burden of the expedi- 
tion and whose understanding has made my many expeditions 
possible. 


Saturday 
December 7th 


Warm and partly cloudy. 

The Geglogical Party is camped on the north side of Mt. 
Nansen, having ascended the west side of Axel Heiberg 
Glacier yesterday. It is snowing hard there. 

McKinley is developing the photographs taken on She 
polar and eastern flights. They are excellent, and show the 
unusual character of this area in detail and relationship 
which no pen nor brush could equal. It paid us handsomely 
to await good weather and visibility, and to put our faith in 


prophets Haines and Harrison. 


Monday 
December oth 


Gould’s Party continued to climb up Mt. Nansen, reach- 
ing a height of 7,500 feet. At 6,500 feet Crockett found 


358 LITTLE AMERICA 


what Gould is sure is lichens. This may be the farthest 
south at which life has been discovered. 

I have delegated Siple to the job of collecting twenty 
Adelie and Emperor Penguins for zoos. If it is possible, we 
shall bring them back to the United States alive. We had 
a dozen of them, last year, but they all got away. They are 
shrewd devils and can escape faster than Houdini. We have 
built a pen for them in the hole formerly occupied by one of 
the Ford’s wing tips, but I don’t think they will stay long. 

The ice in the Bay of Whales is still holding and as yet 
gives no sign of going out. 


Friday 
December 13th 


No word from the Geological Party for two days. 


Saturday 
December 14th 


The Geological Party was on its regular schedule to- 
night. They have been held in camp by a heavy snow storm. 
Gould reports they found our mountain cache last Thursday. 
The wind had scattered the empty gasoline tins and a pair 
of snow glasses was found fifty yards from the cache. He 
says the weather has continued cloudy and squally. 

It would seem that we made the polar flight just in time. 

The Geological Party is now working to the eastward 
and will penetrate Marie Byrd Land—that is, beyond the 150th 
meridian. y 


Sunday 
December 15th 


Siple and Mulroy took a sounding in Ver-sur-Mer Inlet 
today and 1,600 feet of line ran out before it registered bot- 
tom, 

So Little America has been afloat. However, we have al- 
ways been convinced of that. 

A baby Crab-eater seal was found on the bay ice last 
night and has been put in a pen. He will presently join the 
distinguished group of specimens. He is a scrappy little fel- 
low and when aroused makes a queer whistling sound. 


EASTWARD BEYOND THE HORIZON 359 


Wednesday 
December 18th 

We are getting ready to break up the camp. Today 
Black began to collect all equipment not in use—that is, equip- 
ment not necessary for operations. By getting things ready 
now we may escape much confusion at the end. 

It appears that both the City and the Bolling are in for 
another struggle with the pack. The whalers report that ice 
conditions are worse than any within their experience. A 
chaser was sunk in the pack on the 15th, according to a radio 
message which Petersen overheard, and the factory ships 
find the going very hard. 

Consequently, I have sent a message to Brown and Mel- 
ville suggesting that departure of both ships be held up until 
conditions improve. 

We are hoping to make another flight to the eastward of 
Queen Maud Range. This, together with a flight to the 
westward of Little America, should clear up the aviation 
activities of the expedition. Weather, however, remains un- 
favorable. 

A light rain in the form of mist began to fall late 
yesterday and continued intermittently today. 


Friday 
December 20% 

The Geological Party reports that it is camped at Lat. 85° 
27’ S. and Long. 147° 30’ W. Gould says: “Have completely 
proved that Carmen Land does not exist.” They have pene- 
trated Marie Byrd Land and are the first men to set foot on 
American land in the Antarctic. 

The area is, therefore, claimed for the United States and 
may be considered to extend to the Pole. It appears that the 
Barrier lies between Gould’s position and the land we dis- 
covered. 

Tomorrow Gould will begin his march to the westward. 
He has done a fine job. 

W ednesday 
December 25th 


A white Christmas, and a warm one. The temperature 
today was 31° above zero, and Tennant even had trouble 
bringing the ice cream to the freezing point. 


‚ 360 LITTLE AMERICA 


The day was celebrated appropriately. There was a 
Christmas tree wrapped in cotton, and festooned with cigarette 
papers, chewing gum, cough drops and other knick-knacks : 
Taffy Davies took the part of Santa Claus, and though a 
cotton beard hid his jovial face, it could not disguise his 
precious accent. 

There were even cigars and cigarettes, and George Black 
produced a pound of candy for every man. This is luxury. 
The party enjoyed the following quatrain; dedicated to the 
cook : 


“Use one ounce of chicken to each pair of pups, 

If they pop out of dishes, just serve et in cups, 
And if we’re out of mutton this glad Christmas-tide, 
GII season and serve "et with some tender rawhide.” 


Thursday 
December 26th 


The_Geological Party had its own thrilling Christmas on 
the Barrier. They were camped near Mt. Betty, which 
Amundsen had ascended on the return from the Pole, and Dr. 
Gould decided to investigate it. He found the cairn which 
Amundsen had built, and in it the matches, the can of kero- 
sene and the note he and his party left behind, 17 years ago. 1 

Petersen translated the note, which said: “Arrived and 
encircled the South Pole Dec. 14-16, 1911. Have confirmed 
Victoria Land so that it is most likely that King Edward VII 
Land has no connection at 86° south latitude with Victoria 
Land. Also shows this land continues in a colossal mountain 
range toward the south. Could see this enormous mountain 
range to 88° south latitude and most likely from its ap- 
pearance it continues further in the same direction over the 
Antarctic Continent. Passed this cache on our return from 
the South Pole with provisions for 60 days, 2 sledges and 11 
dogs. All well.” 


Roald Amundsen. 


We have been informed by radio that a small airplane at- 
tached to the whaler Kosmos, which has Taylor and his dogs 
*Amundsen, “The South Pole,” ii, 159. “—We built a great cairn, and 


left there a can of 17 litres of kerosene, two packets of matches—contain- 
ing twenty boxes—and an account of our expedition.” 


EASTWARD BEYOND THE HORIZON 361 


aboard, has been lost. The pilot, Leif Lier, and a passenger, 
Dr. Ingvald-Schreiner, took off for a short flight on Christ- 
mas Day, but failed to return. The plane was equipped with 
‚ pontoons and carried fuel for six hours. On the following 
day (they are a day ahead of us because they are west of the 
180th meridian) the sea rose and a thickish fog hampered 
the chasers which were sent out to search for the plane. 

At the time the Kosmos was lying north of the pack. The 
master, Captain Andresen, had intended to use the plane in 
scouting for whales. 

What a pity we can give no aid! The position of the 
Kosmos is more than 800 miles to the north of Little Amer- 
ica, and the Ford, even if it were equipped with pontoons, the 
possession of which would alone justify taking her on such a 
long water hop, has not a sufficient radius of action to allow 
her to make an effective search. Our hands are tied. 

What has happened we cannot tell. No doubt the plane was 
forced down by engine trouble, for visibility, according to 
Captain Andresen, remained clear and the pilot was skillful. It 
is unlikely that he became lost. A number of the men here, 
including Owen and Petersen, knew the pilot, and so the 
sragedy strikes personally. For I believe it is a tragedy. Even 
assuming the landing was made safely, the plane could not 
long exist in the heavy seas which ran on the following day. 
I can imagine no worse predicament than to be forced down 
in the vicinity of the pack. 


Saturday 
December 28th 


No trace of the missing flyers. Apparently Lier had in- 
tended to make a flight to the Balleny Islands. Captain 
Andresen wirelessed yesterday that he had found an entry 
in the pilot’s diary, dated December 26th, the date of his 
disappearance, saying that he would fly to the Balleny Islands 
if weather permitted. In all, sixteen chasers have been search- 
ing for the plane. All but two have been recalled, and these 
have been dispatched to search the waters adjoining the islands. 
The flyers carried emergency rations for only two days. I am 
sure they are lost. Dr. Barnes, who is coming down on the 
City, has been asked to volunteer as physician aboard the Kos- 
mos, to take the place of the doctor who was lost. There are 


362 LITTLE AMERICA 


400 men on the Kosmos and the attendance of a doctor is 
necessary. I am sure that Dr. Barnes will agree to go. 

The pack itself shows no signs of relenting. I am afraid 
it will be a more serious problem this year than last year. 
Petersen, our radio man, who is maintaining a regular schedule 
with all the whaling ships, says the veterans are unanimously 
agreed that this is the worst ice year they have ever known. 

Two whaling factories have at last forced their way through 
the pack, after a very strenuous voyage, the Nilsen Alonzo 
and the Sir James Clark Ross. The Southern Princess was 
turned back by heavy pack at 69° S. 

Both the Kosmos and the C. A. Larsen are still waiting to 
the north of the pack, reluctant to attempt the passage until 
conditions improve. 

Ole Andersen, a gunner on the Ross, has informed Peter- 
sen that the pack is the hardest he has ever seen—it is largely 
heavy, hard ice, green and glassy. How the City can make her 
way through such ice is beyond me. Nevertheless, she must 
try. 


Tuesday 
December 31% 


The Geological Party is homeward bound. In his daily 
message Gould says that they were camped 45 miles north 
of the mountain. They are on the old trail, following the 
snow beacons which they erected on the outward journey. 

I cannot speak too highly of the splendid work these men 
have done. The trip, when finished, will be the longest sledge 
journey ever undertaken for purely geological investigation. 
Once the party started the final advance, it continued without 
a hitch. The weeks, even months, of care and study that 
went into their planning have born fruit. They were green- 
horns when they started, but they carried on like veterans. 

Tonight the year will have run its course. And thanks to 
ali hands a great deal of work has been accomplished. Cer- 
tainly it is doubtful whether much more could have been done, 
everything considered. That, after all, is the test. 

The weather lately has been quite warm, and on the 27th 
and 28th the temperature was, for a few hours, above freezing. 
The wind was from the northeast. It shifted to the southeast, 


EASTWARD BEYOND THE HORIZON 363 


| then to the east, and i3 now blowing softly from the south- 
southeast. 
The ice in the Bay of Whales is beginning to disintegrate. 

It still has a long way to go, though. The northern edge is 
still eight miles from the camp, and a great deal of thick old 
ice lies between. We watch it quite as anxiously as we 
watched it last January. If it goes out no farther, we shall 
have a difficult time hauling the materials out to the ship. 
One thing is certain: there will be no further experiments 
with the Barrier as a pier. The taste of that memory is still 
strong. 

In another month, God willing, we shall be on our way 

back. 


W ednesday 
January Ist 


The New Year begins inauspiciously enough. This time, 
last year, the City was at the Barrier. This year she is still 
at Dunedin. Even the Larsen, for all her tremendous horse- 
power, is just beginning to try to force the pack. It’s a 
tough situation all around. There is a possibility the City 
may be unable to get through. As a last resort we might 
try to induce one of the whalers to come down here and 
take the winter party aboard. But this would be an emerg- 
ency measure. Having continued so long with our own 
resources, we ought to carry on alone as long as possible. 

This much is certain: another winter here, with our de- 
pleted supplies, would work great hardships. Worst of all 
at least two of the men cannot, I believe, survive a second 
winter. They must be protected. 

I have already opened negotiations with several of the 
whaling captains with a view to covering our retreat 
if the City should be blocked. Surely this is the prudent thing 
to do. It may be that I am unduly pessimistic, but there are 
elements in this situation which recommend that every avenue 
be kept open. 

We are fortunate to have Petersen as radio operator. A 
former operator on Norwegian whaling ships, himself a Nor- 
wegian, he knows most of the operators on the ships to the 
north. With their captains’ permission, they keep him posted 


364 LITTLE AMERICA 


on developments, and as a result we have an accurate picture of 
what is taking place in the pack. We would be in a bad way 
without him. The masters of these ships are most generous 
in their cooperation. 


Sunday 
January 5th 


The City has started south. Melville reports: “We sailed 
from Dunedin at 2:30 p.m. but owing to the severe southerly 
gale blowing outside and heavy seas did not proceed, but will 
wait until weather and sea moderate. Barometer low but 
rising gradually.” 

The good old City is in the thick of it from the start. Wait 
until she meets the pack. Then we shall see the stuff she is 
made of. 


Monday 
January biy 


Melville says they dropped the pilot boat at 9 o’clock this 
morning. Weather clear. 
Come on, City! 


CHAPTER XVI 
DEATH OF A CITY 


January found us on tenterhooks. The City was plow- 
ing south, meeting one storm after another, advancing to the 
greatest battle of her always rugged life. Three huge whal- 
ing factories, the Kosmos, the Southern Princess and She C. A. 
Larsen, were still north of the pack, prowling along its edge, 
waiting for wind and tide to accomplish what they dared not 
attempt even with their powerful engines. South of the pack 
were the Nilsen Alonzo and the Sir James Clark Ross, watch- 
ing it with anxiety. Gould’s Geological Party, its job 
done, was racing home from the Mountains. And at 
Little America the winter party had its ears bent to the radio, 
which was handling the heavy traffic flowing from these 
separated units, telling of daily, and in many cases hourly, 
developments. There were grimness and excitement in the 
situation. The pack was an inscrutable, implacable resisting 
force stretched solidly between the parallels of 68° and 70° 5. 

Would it also be our jailor? 

I admit frankly that no situation—not even the struggle 
up the pass of Liv’s Glacier—brought the worry that this one 
did. For we were anxious to get home. Our work was done, 
and waiting was trying after months of great activity. But 
this would have been nothing had we not been worried over 
the physical condition of several men. There were some of 
us who were prepared to spend another winter at Little Amer- 
ica, regardless of the outcome of the City’s struggle with the 
pack, to continue the scientific work of the expedition. The 
plan had already been discussed. But for others the issue 
which hung in the balance was perhaps a matter of life and 
death. If the City failed to get through, at least one man 
might not live to see a second spring. Mason, the radio 
operator, had been developing symptoms of appendicitis. 

365 


366 LITTLE AMERICA 


McKinley, too, was troubled with the same thing. Their 
illness had not progressed sufficiently at that time to incon- 
venience either of them very much, but it was a cause of 
alarm to the rest of us. The physical condition of a third 
man had gone down steadily since the winter. He had lost 
weight rapidly, his nerves were worn out and he was neither 
happy nor well. 

So far as the fundamental needs were concerned, the ex- 
pedition could endure a second winter at Little America. 
There were seals, penguins and skua gulls with which to re- 
plenish the meat supply. We had an adequate amount of de- 
hydrated vegetables to see us through. This contingency had 
been anticipated and prepared for. Nevertheless, an extended 
stay, if it were to come to pass, must work real hardships, 
with nothing but pipe tobacco left and that almost gone and 
the supply of luxuries such as butter, sugar and canned milk 
scarcely sufficient to last another month. 

More, there were some men—I can count them on the 
fingers of one hand—who were sick of the Antarctic, who 
were counting the days when they should return to the United 
States and looked forward to the City’s arrival as a release 
from hard and unprofitable existence. Temperamentally and 
physically, a second winter, especially an enforced second 
winter, would have tried their patience and temper more than 
sorely. 

Truth to tell, I doubt whether there was a single man, my- 
self included, who was really eager to stay. The Antarctic, 
when all is said and done, is no pleasure resort. Even the very 
few modern conveniences which we had introduced had 
scarcely relieved its hardships. The hardest kind of existence 
that any organism has cut out for itself on this planet is that 
of the Emperor penguin, Mr. Cherry-Garrard has said. 
And even he has the sense to abandon it before winter comes. 
The Antarctic offers little enough solace, stimulation and sat- 
isfaction to a scientist and explorer with work to do. When 
that work is done, it seems the loneliest, most God-forsaken 
spot on this globe. Doubtless it is. 

So, through the miraculous agency of the radio and the 
unremitting efforts of Mason and Petersen, we followed the 
skirmishing between the pack and the vessels which lay out- 
side; and as conditions grew worse instead of better and as 


DEATH OF A CITY 367 


_ it became apparent that this was perhaps the worst ice year 
in a decade, there were some who felt like going out there and 
trying to hammer it apart with their fists. 


Monday 
January Oth 


The Geological Party is coming fast. They camped at 82° 
16’ shortly after two o’clock this morning. Soft snow has 
made the going rather hard these last few days, but men and 
dogs are apparently well. 

I informed Gould today of the developments to date with 
respect to the City of New York, the whalers and the pack. 
It was hard to give them bad news on top of such an arduous 
journey. 

If the City is here before February, we shall be in luck, 
according to present indications. There has been no im- 
provement in the pack during the past week. 

The dear old City is right in the thick of trouble. Cap- 
tain Melville radioed today: “Terrific southwest gale all night. 
Squalls of hurricane force. Rain, hail and a very high sea. 
Hove to under sail. At present moderation indicated.” Then 
later: “8 A.m. Am under sail and steam. Ship laboring 
heavily in high seas. All well. Regards.” 


Thursday 
January diy 


No schedule with the Geological Party today. 

The City’s noon position was Lat. 47° 28’ S., Long. 172° 
25 E. Weather fine and the ship under both steam and sail. 
Her position is about 123 miles south of Tairoa Head. 

Our penguin farm will be the end of Siple. 

For the past month he has had about a dozen Emperors 
and about half a dozen Adelies in the pit formerly occupied by 
one of the Ford wing tips. Not the same ones all the time, 
however. That is the trouble. The shrewd little creatures 
get out every time. They spurn kindness and attention; they 
pay no heed to the inducements of civilization and the offer 
of a fine berth for their declining years in an American zoo- 
logical garden. They refuse food, even though Siple and 
Bursey have lured them with canned meat, frankfurters, 


368 LITTLE AMERICA 


sardines and strips of seal meat and blubber nicely cut up. 
They rebuff these advances, and the moment their captors’ 
backs are turned try to scramble from the pit. And by means 
of some extraordinary occult power, they almost always suc- 
ceed. 

When the first batch escaped, Siple hoped to keep the 
others in by setting a ring of bamboo pickets, the points of 
which were pointed in, about the rim of the hole. But the 
rogues shoved them aside with their bills. Then he massed 
gasoline drums about the hole, and caught a third batch. 
But every day one or two of them mysteriously disappeared. 
Exactly how they escaped we did not learn until Thorne came 
in one day with the news that he had seen a new flock of 
penguins waddling about the camp. Siple, suspecting the 
worst, rushed out and found half his penguins gone. Two 
were in the act of scrambling over the backs of the rest, whose 
bodies were heroically massed in a kind of a pyramid at the 
bottom of the pit—a sacrificial altar, if you will. The pen- 
guins in the bottom cannot escape, of course. Poor devils, I 
have already begun to regret having promised to bring them 
north. 

Fr; 
January roth 


The Geological Party is camped on the southern edge of 
the crevasses at 81° 16’ tonight, having been impeded since 
Wednesday by soft snow and fog. 

The City logged 100 miles during the last twenty-four 
hours. That’s the way to do it. 


Saturday 
January II 


We have decided to begin preparing for loading operations 
at once. The more we examine the situation, the more it be- 
comes apparent that we are confronted by abnormal ice con- 
ditions. It will be touch and go whether we shall be able to 
get north this year. As if the extraordinary thickness and 
density of the pack were not trouble enough, the ice in the 
Bay of Whales continues to hold. If anything, it is worse 
than last year. The northern edge is at least 8 miles from Ver- 


3o3eav pesha 94} top peuuepo puer Mou əy} Jo yed vt 3a, cepo Buoy Klol E A] edola pue e8uel 48 e ST 
3T ‘SII 002 lop vloshvo Aellu3 pemov Aq paciei3ojoci sem e3uet 5IChI, 'uəye} 3em ydeisojoyd əy} pocm AeMeE sapsh OS uey} alosh alam SUIeJUNOW ƏSL 


‘HOO 10 yaytpa HOI, Y Ad ayachatAt([ ChOMYM MOF tya5a AHL cho yachtoyto) tya3pka NV 
CAMON udeo Aq o3ocha) 


M 


Bee 


WHALES TRAPPED IN A CRACK THAT SUDDENLY OPENED OP AT THE BACK 
Door ok LITTLE AMERICA. 


4 


DEATH OF A CITY 369 


sur-Mer Inlet. It was so widely ridged and cracked that we 
believe it would go out much quicker this year; but on the 
contrary it remains fast and stubborn. If there is no improve- 
ment before the City’s arrival, and I doubt if there will be, we 
certainly will have neither the time nor the dogs to carry our 
supplies over that distance. There are only two good teams in 
camp.’ A third team is out with Dr. Coman and Blackburn, 
who for several weeks have been making a survey of the Bay 
of Whales, and Gould has five more, making a total of eight 
available for loading. 

We made a study of the bay ice today and came to the con- 
clusion that the ice is more likely to begin to go out along the 
western side of the Barrier than on this side. We have, there- 
fore, decided to begin moving part of the equipment to Floyd 
Bennett Harbor by sledge teams, so that when the City arrive’ 
as little time as is possible will be lost in loading here. Me 
Kinley has been put in charge of this operation. A camp will 
be made about a mile in from the mouth of the harbor. Heaven 
help them if the ice starts to go out with a rush while they 
are on the bay ice. It may be perverse enough to carry out 
bay ice, harbor ice, camp and all. But I doubt very much that 
this will happen. There was no movement of ice in Floyd 
Bennett Harbor last year; and, to judge from the characteris- 
tics of the ice, there has been pope for many years. Never- 
theless, the men have been ordered to sleep on the Barrier. 

The City’s run under sail today was 140 miles. 


Sunday 
January rath 


Gould says the Geological Party is camped tonight in the 
middle of the crevasses, awaiting better weather before continu- 
ing. Fog shut down on them as they reached the worst area, 
and Dr. Gould decided to camp rather than risk his 
men and sledges in trying to grope through the area in the 
fog. According to Gould, the area has changed considerably 
since they went through it on the outward journey, and much 
of the old trail has disappeared. I imagine they are in a very 
tight corner. 

The City made 83 miles during the last 24 hours. Her 
last position was Lat. 52° 15’ S, Long. 175° 31’ E. She is 
now under steam, wind having failed. 


370 LITTLE AMERICA 


I am still holding the Bolling at Dunedin, until conditions 
improve. Captain Brown is tearing his hair out. If the Bolling 
were an armored cruiser, he could not be more eager to pit her 
against the pack. She is just an ordinary metal ship and we 
cannot afford to risk her in such heavy pack. Although she is 
protected in the bow her stern sheets are more than ordinarily 
vulnerable. It is my opinion that Brown was extremely fortu- 
nate in bringing the Bolling through on the first trip. Judging 
from the present experience and the experience of other ex- 
ploration parties in the past, the conditions under which a small 
metal ship can be safely sent through the pack are not always 
available. 


Monday 
January 13th 


The Geological Party is still camped in the crevasses, held 
by fog. 

The situation with respect to the pack is really alarming. 
Both the Ross and the Nilsen Alonzo report very poor fishing, 
whereas the whalers to the north are finding good fishing. 
Moreover, the gunners on the Ross and the Nilsen Alonzo 
report that the few whales they have caught are scarred, show- 
ing that even the whales had a fearful battle trying to get 
through the pack. In my opinion, the Ross and the Nilsen 
Alonzo will start north very soon. If they go, the only source 
of immediate aid within eight hundred miles is lost. I shall 
therefore send a request for a chaser on the next radio 
schedule. 


Tuesday 
January 14th 


Captain Andresen, of the Kosmos, radioed today that he 
did not expect the pack to open up before the end of January 
or the beginning of February. He said also that he would not 
attempt to move his ship south until the pack opened. Fish- 
ing north of the pack, he added, was excellent, and so he has 
nothing to gain by attempting a passage. 

We can, therefore, expect no help from that quarter, if the 
City fails. 

Today I addressed strong messages to Captain Vermeli, 
of the Nilsen Alonzo and Captain Thorstensen, of the Ross, 


DEATH OF A CITY 371 


describing our predicament and asking them if it would be 
practicable to send two chasers to the Bay of Whales, to take 
off our equipment and the sick men in the event of an emer- 
gency. 

Until the situation resolves itself, we must develop and hold 
every avenue of escape. 

Apart from the protection of the sick men, what worries 
me most is the disposition of our equipment. If the Bolling 
is unable to get through, we shall be out of luck, that’s all. The 
City cannot accommodate 42 men, as well as her own crew, 
and all the supplies here, a large part of which is valuable. 


Wednesday 
January 15th 


The whole story of today’s development was told in the 
ironic note which Petersen posted on the bulletin board: 


“To the anxious public: 


“S.S. Ross is leaving now—but NORTHWARD. Swallow it, 
boys. But don’t worry if our own ships can’t get through. 
The Ross says: WE WILL GET THROUGH AND GET YOU ALL, SO 
DON’T WORRY. 

“Alonzo is still in the Ross Sea. She also says: DON’T 
WORRY. 

“5. S. Kosmos said: Heard Ross’s message to you this 
morning and add: Don’t worry. We won't leave you behind.” 


PETE 


The anxious public, which follows Pete’s messages on 
the bulletin board as crowds used to mass in front of the bulle- 
tin boards of newspaper offices in July, 1914, took the news 
hard. 

But the rest of the camp was more amused than anything 
else. 

The one bit of good news came from Gould’s party. 

With dog food running short and tired of trying to out- 
wait the fog, they retraced their steps and made a new trail 
around the crevasses. Twelve miles on they picked up the 
trail and are now camped at 80° 27’ S “with all going well.” 

They should arrive within five days. I am relieved. 


372 LITTLE AMERICA 


Thursday 
January TOT 


Today I renewed my petition to Captain Vermeli, of the 
Nilsen Alonzo, asking him to send a chaser to the Bay of 
Whales to pick up a number of men and the more essential 
equipment. It had been arranged previously that he should 
send a chaser with supplies which he took aboard for us at New 
Zealand, and so I think he will do this. | 

At the same time I instructed Captain Brown to be ready to 
start the Bolling south by Saturday. 

It is a blow to pride to have to call for help, but the cir- 
cumstances leave no alternative. The whaling masters can ill 
spare the time to succor exploring parties, whose troubles are 
no fault of theirs. Every day lost from fishing when fishing is 
good means a sacrifice of $30,000 to the owners and stock- 
holders. As the crews’ wages are in the nature of a bonus, the 
cost of assisting us must come, in part, from their pockets, un- 
less we are prepared to pay it ourselves. 


Later 


Captain Vermeli’s reply is at hand. 


ADMIRAL Byrp, WFA 


Your message received. I have no doubt that the ice will 
break up in a week or so, so your ships will get through. As the 
whales are very scarce in the Ross Sea this year we are now going 
through the ice pack again. If your ships should not get through 
we will do our best to help you. Kind regards. 


VERMELI. 
And that is that. I hope that Captain Vermeli is right. 


Still Later 
There is another message from Captain Vermeli: 


ADMIRAL Byv, WFA 


I quite understand your situation. However the situation on 
our behalf is this. We have now been lying here for more than 
a month and during this time caught very few whales. We have 
hoped all along the whales would appear, but in vain. All this 
time we used quite a lot of coal and fuel oil and we have very 


TYH LA JO AVG AHL OLNI SHANINAA WAdVAISAMS opochycky ky 


THE City IN Her TouGHEst BATTLE. 


This photograph was taken on her last journey to the Bay of Whales, when nearly 200 
tons of ice accumulated on her. 


ly lech‏ وهي قق ىة Dum.‏ ةا ee Ba me.‏ وف eee‏ ق aml‏ د و 


DEATH OF A CITY 373 


small quantities left of both. This week we received reports that 
the whalers outside find fishing good. For this reason we now are 
on our way north, but if you are absolutely hard up for food we 
shall send a chaser down. In that case it means stopping the whole 
expedition and we shall have to stay here another week. Regards. 


I sympathize with his point of view, but our needs are 
also important. 

Again I renewed our request for a chaser, but when he 
next answered the Nilsen Alonzo was already in the pack 
and he therefore could not send it. 

I have made known the facts to the camp in a memorandum. 
In my opinion, the City has but one chance in ten of making 
the passage—the Bolling has none. 

Worst of all, the City has apparently started south with- 
out sufficient coal to see her through a sustained battle with 
the pack. Why this happened is beyond me. I have in- 
structed Brown to take on another 50 tons for her, and am 
now radioing the Kosmos, Southern Princess and Larsen which 
are still north of the pack, to see if they can spare a few tons! 


Saturday 
January 18 


The Geological Party reported today it will reach Little 
America some time tomorrow afternoon. Thus will end 
a magnificent journey. They have now been gone three 
months, and it will be good to have them in camp. 

Petersen has prepared the following summary of today’s 
developments, which he posted on the bulletin board: 

“$$. Ross has been stuck in the pack since yesterday 
afternoon, and is still stuck. Ice is up to 36 feet thick, 
packed hard, and impossible to move. It is likely the belt 
of thick pack ice is not more than 25 or 30 miles wide. 
Snow yesterday with northwest wind, but today clearing 
and wind shifted to southeast, which ought to cause some 
movement in the ice. 

I have laid the facts bearing on the situation before 
Captain Railey, who is in charge of expedition affairs in 
New York, suggesting that he sound out the owners of the 
Nilsen Alonzo with a view to determining whether or not 
they are willing to order the ship to return and pick us up, 


374 LITTLE AMERICA 


in case the City is unable to run the pack. I have urged 
Railey particularly to keep the matter confidential. As a 
matter of fact, our position is by no means unsafe. Not 
yet at least. Prudence suggests, however, that our lines of 
transportation be kept open. I have made this quite clear. 

The need is simply for patience—patience and control 
of the situation. 


At 9:30 o’clock op the morning of January 190, the 
sledges of the Geological Party were seen defiling across the 
Barrier slopes. We gave them a royal welcome, for they 
had done a wonderful job. It was not the fact of having 
sledged 1500 miles that was remarkable. It was the fact 
that these men had started this punishing trip as green, from 
the point of view of experience, as bay trees. They went 
through with the dash and élan of youth. To that they 
added resourcefulness, and stubbornness. I doubt that few 
veterans could have done as well. For the measure of the 
trip lay in the balancing of what was planned in advance 
and what was actually done: if anything, they exceeded the 
plans. How fit they were may be judged from the fact they 
made 34 miles on the last day’s march and were travelling 
strong when they reached Little America. 

Thorne was in the lead, on skis. Behind him came 
Gould, with a bristling beard and wearing a red and white 
sash about his waist. O’Brien was behind him, and then 
Vaughan. Goodale brought up the rear-guard. What they 
had endured had left its mark on their faces and bodies. 
They were lean, hard, grizzled and dirty. The most jovial, 
tattered and unwashed group of pirates that ever disgraced 
a quarterdeck would have blushed at the appearance of our 
scientists. That men could become so dirty on the tidy sur- 
face of the Barrier was incredible. Of course, it was soot 
from the stoves. Gasoline was much too precious to be 
wasted in melting snow for bathing. “A bath—and Para- 
dise,” Goodale yelled. They thronged into the mess hall, 
pillaging the precious pots of water which Tennant had stored 
for kitchen use; and as the layers of grime flaked and dis- 
solved, we saw, as through a glass darkly, how very well 
and strong they looked. 

With the men re-united for the first time in more than 


DEATH OF A CITY 375 


three months, we forgot for a time the uncertainty which 
lay over the pack, but not for long. Thereafter it was with 
us every waking hour. If, during the winter, we had dis- 
cussed every subject under the sun, some of us now concen- 
trated on one. Sooner or later the pack edged into every con- 
versation. How long will the pack hold? Can the City get 
through? Would it be worth while to risk her in the face 
of unfavorable conditions? Can and will the whalers really 
come through the pack? “What’s new?” was the first ques- 
tion. And for days the answer was “nothing.” The radio 
room was a magnet that drew the more fretful men. Here 
Petersen posted the messages from the whalers and the 
City. There was the thought in the back of several minds that 
important and bad news was being concealed, which was not 
the case at all. For example, June, Smith and Crockett, who 
were operators, could overhear the dots and dashes as the 
radio men sent and received them. 

But, on the whole, as any serious situation does, the affair 
yielded its lightest side. There was far more joking over the 
situation than dismay. There was formed the Harbor 
Board, so called after the organization of that name which 
handles marine activities at Dunedin; and this committee met 
every night for lengthy discussions and mad proposals. As a 
result the pack and this train of consequences became unreal 
and ludicrous. 

Meanwhile Captain McKinley went forward with his 
plans for demobilizing Little America. This was a difficult 
problem in itself. If both the City and the Bolling reached 
the Bay of Whales, the problem would simply be one of 
loading. If only the City made the passage, then the problem 
was one of selection. From the beginning of January I had 
scant hopes that the Bolling would get south of the pack, and 
began to prepare accordingly. Orders were issued to the 
various departments to begin listing all material in their charge 
under three classifications of importance. Class A. was to 
include records and valuable scientific apparatus. Classes 
B. and C. were progressively lower ratings of material. Three 
general piles were to be made of the supplies and records, 
according to these classifications, so that if and when the City 
arrived alone, the most important stuff could be put aboard 
her at once. As the material accumulated, the dog drivers, 


376 LITTLE AMERICA 


under the direction of McKinley, began to transport it to the 
camp at Floyd Bennett Harbor. The camp was approximately 
to miles from Little America, and as the trail wound back 
and forth around the pressure ridges the task of moving 
supplies was no less troublesome than when we first landed 
in the Bay of Whales. 

January 2oth, the City came within sight of the Kosmos, 
but a gale from the north stirred up such a heavy sea that 
she could not come alongside. 

The Bolling put out from Dunedin the same day, the 
Ross was still stuck in the pack, beset by storm and fog, and 
the Nilsen Alonzo had plowed within 25 miles of the northern 
edge of the pack. Once more the whaling companies renewed 
their pledge to stand by with assistance. For this I was grate- 
ful. But assistance would come high. It would cost $500,000 
to bring a whaling factory ship to the Bay of Whales. Dol- 
lars and cents—they were the commanding elements in the 
situation. Let me make this point clear: the whaling mas- 
ters were neither reluctant to come to our aid nor mercenary. 
I knew most of them, and a finer group of men never walked 
the deck of a ship. And we, on the other hand, had neither 
the right nor the desire to pass the cost on to their crews, 
owners and stockholders. No matter what the cost, we were 
prepared to move our sick men to civilization, if it meant 
pledging everything we had or ever would have. That was 
an inescapable responsibility, and it was only fair that we 
should be ready to carry it alone. 

A thick, heavy fog extending to higher altitudes put a stop 
to flying in January but on the 201 Captain McKinley finished 
mapping the Bay of Whales. On the following day I also flew 
to the westward, to continue the study of the Barrier. With 
me went Captain McKinley, June and Petersen. We used the 
Ford. We took off at 2:12 o’clock p.m. and followed the 
coast line to the west. Visibility was excellent. There was a 
scattering of clouds in the distant west. The Ross Sea was 
spattered with bergs and fragments of pack. 

Discovery Inlet was underneath at 3:05 o’clock. As we 
circled it at an altitude of 2,000 feet, the thought occurred 
to me that here was one of the most interesting bays in the 
world. Entrenched most probably behind a submerged ridge 


DEATH OF A CITY 377 


of land, it resisted the stubborn and inexhaustible surges of 
the ice sheet which would engulf it and remained one of the 
few apparently permanent spots on the front of the moving 
, Barrier. We confirmed what we had learned when we first in- 
vestigated Discovery, in 1929; that while the outer part of it 
runs east and west, as the charts show, an inner member 
bends to the south. Between the tips of a V-shaped formation 
which forms the eastern wall of the outer bay, we saw a deep 
crack, sufficiently extensive to suggest that it extended to the 
bottom of the Barrier. Here, it would seem, the millions of 
tons of solid ice and snow resting on submerged land had 
split under its own weight. 

We headed due south, studying the Barrier. Mile after 
mile, the snowscape remained unchanged—fairly flat, smooth 
Barrier. Just before four o’clock we sighted a faint ruffling 
in the surface—crevasses—to the westward, and at 4:02 o’clock 
we changed course to bring us nearer. The surface for sev- 
eral miles was quite broken, and the movement apparently cen- 
tered about a series of fairly high ridges, running eastward 
and westward. McKinley and June were certain that they saw 
black rock showing through, but I thought it was merely the 
shadows thrown by ridges. The ridges were at Lat. 80° S. and 
Long. 173° E—almost due west of the area through which the 
dog teams had struggled. This was an important discovery in- 
asmuch as it indicated that the Barrier in the vicinity either 
rested on the ocean bed or on an ocean peak. It was another bit 
of knowledge about the Barrier and when all the bits are finally 
put together, the mystery of the Barrier will be explained. 

After flying about 12 miles to the westward, we turned east 
for a few minutes and then headed south until 4:30 o’clock. 
Far in the distance the Barrier began to rise, in swelling un- 
dulations, suggestive of a gradual inclination of the ocean 
flooring. 

McKinley photographed this area, and we then turned for 
home, cutting diagonally across the Barrier. The return was 
without incident. 

During the flight, however, a very important message from 
Captain Railey, who was moving heaven and earth for us 
at New York, asking for information about the pack, 
was relayed by radio from Little America. Petersen radioed 


378 LITTLE AMERICA 


my reply and it was relayed at once to New York City. I cite 
this merely as an example of how effectively the modern or- 
ganization of exploration can keep in touch with its affairs. 

The next few days brought no end of troubles and excite- 
ment. First of all, there was the fear in my mind that Captain 
Melville might be persuaded against his better judgment to 
attempt to force a passage before the ice was sufficiently open. 
If he failed and the City became beset, there would be need of 
relieving her as well. Stout as were her old sides, her engines 
were much too weak to contend with very heavy pack. Then, 
too, reports were conflicting. It was almost impossible to 
know exactly what was going on within the broad reaches of 
the pack. One master dismissed it airily; “a good south wind,” 
he said, “would break it up over-night.” Another said: “it is 
the toughest pack we have ever seen.” Come what may, I was 
determined the City should not start south as long as the 
situation remained confused. In the United States our friends, 
alarmed over our position, began to hammer through official 
channels for immediate action. Immediate action was not 
necessary; we did not want official action. There still re- 
mained, at that time, nearly a month for the City to try to 
carry off the job on her own resources. At the most, we de- 
sired only assurances of cooperation. 

To cap the matter, sensational newspapers in the United 
States picked up a false report from an amateur radio operator 
that not only had the City reached the Barrier, but the entire 
expedition was hastily embarking. Had that report been true, 
nothing could have pleased us more. However, it was solemnly 
posted on the bulletin board in the mess hall with the ex- 
planation: “interesting, if true.” 

From the Nilsen Alonzo came word that she was stuck in 
the pack again, surrounded by a belt of very heavy ice. She 
had not come through the northern passage unscotched. Her 
bow, we learned, had been badly injured in forcing movements, 
and the Captain was unwilling to risk the weakened structure in 
further assaults until conditions improved. 

The Ross, we learned, had injured her propeller in the 
battle. 

If these great vessels, with their wealth of horsepower, 
commanded by masters long versed in the lore of the pack, 


DEATH OF A CITY 379 


could not go through without injury, is it any wonder that 
we were reluctant to throw at this time the City into a final 
struggle? 

By the 26th, the Ross and the Nilsen were in open sea, 
north of the pack, and we were in the possession of the facts 
bearing on the situation. Both Captain Thorstensen, of the 
Ross, and Captain Vermeli, of the Nilsen Alonzo, reported 
heavy, hard ice and advised us not to order the City through 
before the middle of February. A final analysis came from the 
veteran ice pilot of the City, Bendik Johansen: 


January 28 

No. 42 WFBT 
Amplvag Byrd, WFA 

. . . After talking with Captain Vermeli, I also saw Captain 
Andresen and Captain Nilsen. The pack ice is very heavy from 
(Lat.) 68° S. and 70° S. and extends west towards the western 
shore of the Balleny Islands. From 68° to 69° it is heavy, dan- 
gerous old ice, with hard ice foots. South of 69° it is only year- 
old ice, which is also heavily packed but less dangerous. For the 
City of New York there is no danger in going through, but we 
will have to take our time in going through. We still have four 
weeks on which to figure. The Eleanor Bolling ought not to try 
to force the pack. Captains Andresen, Nilsen, and Vermeli are of 
the same opinion. I think the Bolling ought to stay on the outside 
of the pack and be ready in case anything happens. It would be 
wise to have support behind in case the whalers should have fin- 
ished whaling before we get out. I wouldn’t advise you to take 
the Bolling through at all. I would start here and go in about 
68° S. and 178° E. and follow the meridian true south. Cannot 
tell about exact conditions until we are there. Ice conditions can 
change within an hour. I firmly believe that we will be able to 


get in and out. Regards, | 
JOHANSEN. 


With these reports in hand, the confusion that had hung 
over the situation was dissipated. February to, therefore, 
was set as a tentative date for the raising of the siege. 

Coal, the curse which had dogged us before, lifted its 
ugly head. More than once I had reason to regret the limited 
capacity of the City, but never did I rue it as much as then. 
During the time she was lying off the pack, she was 
under steam most of the time, and this unexpected con- 
sumption was beginning to deplete her reserve. The radio 


380 LITTLE AMERICA 


department swung into action again, and we tried to borrow as 
much coal as could be spared from the whalers. The Larsen 
offered 55 tons and the Kosmos 25, the latter giving us what 
was left, beyond immediate needs, of her galley supply. As 
these vessels are all oil-burners, they carry only enough coal 
to supply their chasers; and at this advanced stage of the 
season they had precious little to spare. For that matter 
most of them had not enough for their own requirements. 
I therefore decided to order Captain Brown to take the 
Bolling back to Dunedin, take on as much coal as she could 
safely hold, and return to the pack. Thus, if the City came 
out of the ice with depleted bunkers, we would have a reserve 
supply at hand. But the Bolling had already reached the 
pack on January 29th, and Captain Brown, in his indomitable 
way, plunged right in, sending me the following message: 


ADMIRAL Byrp, WFA 


We are in the northern edge of the ice pack and have coal 
aboard for 32 days. I recommend that we go through. I assure 
you I will not endanger the ship or crew. Give us a chance to 
try this. Regards. 


Brown. 


Twenty-four hours later the gallant Bolling and her crew, 
who through a cruel turn of affairs were destined to shoulder 
most of the dirty work of the expedition, had turned their backs 
on the pack and were steaming northward. This was a bitter 
blow to all hands on the Bolling, but the way Brown, 
McGuinness, Adams and the crew took it was typical of their 
spirit to the end. Had there been po other way, I am sure 
they would have taken the Bolling through, if they had had to 
berth it in sections in the Bay of Whales. 

On the 29th we were notified by our government and the 
Norwegian government that the Norwegian whaling companies 
had agreed to render us assistance in case it was needed with 
the provision that we agree to reimburse the companies for 
whatever losses were incurred. The heavy item was insurance. 
The insurance alone necessary for the protection of the whaling 
ship during the passage would be, we learned, between $200,000 
or $250,000. 

February came in, dark and gloomy, with the hint of im- 
pending winter in the air and a darkening of the sky at night. 


‘IE e sh pocegulto WOI} paa$ pec voshoshy APT 3e pesh oci 301093 1514 IJL 
"5918 AA JO Avg əy} ou suInja1 “a3osh$ vas ay} olofe 3utmocv syrom Iəddn lec Ájuo ‘xod tam fo Cp? achy, 


note ANOOTIM V 


DEATH OBA CITY 381 


A strong cold wind blew from the south, and the sound of the 
sea beating on the Barrier cliffs to the north was plainly heard, 
January went out in a heavy snow storm, and the whole camp 

‘was blanketed. Even the Ford lay half-buried. Fire broke out 
in the radio storeroom on the 6th, when gasoline spilled from 
the blow torch was ignited. It was put out with small dam- 
age, the incident being chiefly distinguished by the fact that one 
of the pups ran off with my windproof trousers, which I was 
indiscrete enough to lay aside while helping to put out the fire. 

Continuing southerly winds had begun to break up the pack. 
February 6th, the City went alongside the Southern Princess 
and took aboard fifty tons of coal. That evening Captain 
Melville decided to try his luck. He tackled the pack in the 
vicinity of the 179th meridian and headed south. The going 
for fifty miles was very difficult, The ice was tightly packed 
and interlocked with immense bergs. In places it reached a 
thickness of twenty feet. On at least two occasions the City 
barely wriggled from a dangerous squeeze. “We just ham- 
mered and hammered,” Captain Melville said. “We would 
make a few feet and stop, then back up and charge again. 
Sometimes we would gain a mile at a time through a lead, and 
often make no impression at all.” Johansen, in the crow’s 
nest, “conned” the pack and inevitably, when it seemed that ge- 
treat was the only alternative, he discovered a saving lead. The 
pounding continued all night and most of the next day. On 
the 7th, however, the ice lightened somewhat, open water be- 
came more frequent and toward seven o’clock in the evening 
the ice commenced to heave so violently that Captain Melville 
was certain they were nearing open sea. The wind stiffened, 
bringing snow squalls and cold, and as fast as they pushed 
through it the mushy ice froze into solid new ice six inches 
thick, which greatly impeded their progress. At eleven o'clock 
the look-out sang out he had seen the open sea. Beset by ice 
propelled by a south wind, they stubbornly pressed on, and at 
midnight entered the Ross Sea. The wind by then had reached 
almost hurricane force. Captain Melville sent the following 
message : 


ApMIRAL Byrp, WFA 


We are in the Ross Sea. Estimated position at 8 a.m. Lat. 
69.30° 5., Long. 178° E. Hove to in clear water. Severe south- 


382 LITTLE AMERICA 


erly gale of hurricane force and heavy swell. Have passed 
through 60 miles of new pancake ice varying in thickness up to 
six inches. With a low temperature and calm, the ice pack will 
become impassable. Therefore strongly urge that base party be 
prepared to leave on arrival as any delay might prove serious. 
With more favorable conditions we should arrive at Bay of 
Whales in five or six days. 


It had taken the City thirty-seven hours and twenty minutes 
to make the passage. She had caught the pack at just the right 
time. Patience had been rewarded. 

We sprang to the task of breaking camp with delight. The 
men were divided into groups, and the following memorandum 
was posted: 


February 8th, 1930 


The following is the list for details of loading, McKinley will 
be in charge at the ship. 

Any one desiring relief from any one of the following details 
will obtain permission from either McKinley or Gould. 

The following men will go to Floyd Bennett Harbor Sunday 
morning. These men will make camp and sort supplies: 


Black (in charge of the loading of sledges and sorting sup- 
plies.) 4 
Chips Gould (carpenter and will also help sort supplies.) 
Mulroy (will sort supplies.) 
Feury (cook and will help sort supplies) 


The following men will go to Floyd Bennett Harbor on 
Monday: 


Balchen (in charge of camp) 

Demas (sorting supplies) 

Parker (sorting supplies) 

Smith (radio operator and helping with supplies) 
Details after the ship’s arrival. 


At Floyd Bennett Harbor: The following men will load dog 
teams: 


Black (in charge of loading) 
Feury (cook and loading) 
Demas 

Harrison 


UBA HOBA CTP 383 
At ship: 


Strom (in charge of stowing and securing cargo on ship.) 
Balchen (will assist Strom) 

Chips Gould (will put up additional standee bunks on ship.) 
Haines (will assist Chips Gould) 


The following men will be under the direction of the man in 
charge of loading at the ship: 


Blackburn Mulroy 
Bubier O’Brien 
Clark Parker 
Czegka Roth 
Davies Smith 
De Ganahl Thorne 


Dog drivers (Note: these men will sleep and eat at Floyd 
Bennett Harbor) 


Alexander Goodale 
Braathen Walden 
Bursey Vaughan 
Crockett 


If only 23 hours are available for loading all hands will work 
straight through. If the ship is here longer than that the watches 
will be divided 12 and 12. 

Mail will be given out immediately after ship gets under way 
for home. 

Members of the Winter Party will be excused from all details 


on board ship for 24 hours after sailing. 
K E. BYRD 


With the posting of that order Little America began to dis- 
integrate before our eyes. Men were busy packing clothes and 
gear. The scientists were crating their records and instru- 
ments. The sound of hammering continued with unabating 
enthusiasm. And with the dissipation of uncertainty, spirits 
mounted wonderfully. 

The City, however, found the Ross Sea in an evil mood. 
A few minutes after Captain Melville reported reaching open 
water, the wind stiffened to hurricane force and gusts reached 
velocities in excess of 100 miles. The air ran with snow and 
visibility shut down to zero. The City met the storm head-on 
and managed to steam six miles south of the pack. Here her 
engines could not prevail against the seas, and she was driven 


384 LITTLE AMERICA 


back. A small storm tris’l was set to keep her head to the 
seas, which were treacherous. 

As she retreated slowly, a new danger appeared. The ship 
was driven into a spur of the pack, and in the darkness, im- 
mense floes, rising and grinding under the combined force of 
wind and seas, towered menacingly at the crests of the waves. 
Because the rudder and stern sheets are the most vulnerable 
points of the City, it was necessary to bring her head into the 
ice. Melville swung her to port. Although the engines were 
full on, she failed to come around quickly in the face of the 
tremendous seas and in a moment tons of green water swept 
over the rail. The deck cargo shifted, heavy steel fuel drums 
broke away from their lashings and charged into the bulwarks 
and rails, smashing them; the bags of coal washed into the 
companionways, blocking them so that the men below were 
trapped and the decks were raked unceasingly by a cross sea. 

In the darkness, they were driven into the pack. The stern, 
poised high, came down with fearful violence op a floe. A mo- 
ment later another large mass of ice smashed against her star- 
board quarter. “I thought, for a moment, the blow had finished 
her,” Captain Melville said. But the stout old City took it with 
no more than a shiver, and Melville stopped the engine to save 
the propeller. “Had ope of those floes, sliding up and down 
those towering seas, crashed on the deck, it would have crushed 
it to pulp,” the radio operator, Berkner, said. 

Captain Melville worked the ship farther into the pack, 
and the swell decreased. But even with bare sticks, she made 
more than six knots backwards. The wind at times reached 
a velocity of 100 miles per hour. 

The gale lasted for 24 hours, and during that time the 
City clung to the lee of the pack, waiting for it to subside. 
The following afternoon the sea calmed somewhat, and the 
City ventured south again. The Ross Sea was choked for 
twenty miles with new ice which had been blown from the 
south, and the ship had some difficulty traversing it. The tem- 
perature had fallen to zero, and new ice was forming in their 
wake. There has been no sun for three or four days and 
the proximity of the vessel to the magnetic Pole rendered the 
compasses all but useless. 


The sky cleared and for two days the City drove south at a 


DEATH OF A CITY 385 


goodish clip. Then the gale struck her again, and this time 
nearly finished her. On the night of the toy a soweaster 
sprung up, cold and raw. By morning it had reached almost 
hurricane force. Snow fell continuously, and the spray whip- 
ping from the choppy sea froze on the decks and rigging as 
fast as it fell. Captain Melville, recognizing the danger, 
ordered the crew to clear the ship with axes and hammers; 
but the ice formed faster than they could chop it away. The 
next day she was actually going down a few feet by the head 
under the load of ice. A cylinder of ice, ten feet thick, covered 
the bowsprit and the martingale; and the mass of ice on her 
decks brought her so low that every other sea boarded and 
swept her from fore to aft. The engine was cut to half speed 
to lessen the impact of the seas against the head gear. Erick- 
son was injured in a daring attempt to smash the ice from the 
bowsprit. [f the bowsprit gave way, the topmasts and rigging 
must have come crashing down. The ship had actually gone 
down two feet under the load of ice. 

The gale continued for four days, with scarcely a break, 
and during that period, which was surely as trying as any that 
Providence could inflict upon a wooden ship, the City’s plucky 
crew never wavered once. How hard the battle was we did 
not realize at Little America. There were hints of it in the 
meagre messages that flew between the base and ship, sand- 
wiched in between discussions over mattresses, knives and 
forks, bedding, food, plates, bunks and the like—things we 
should have to take along to eke out the supplies of the City, 
which was scarcely equipped to handle 60 men. 


February 13th 


Our dead reckoning position is Lat. 76° 22! S., Long. 179° 54 
W. Just one continuous southeast blizzard. Force 9 and 10 and 
a rough, confused head sea. Ship laboring heavily in sea way. 
Practically hove to with engines at full speed. Regards. 

MELVILLE 


February 15th 


The vessel is iced up in the worst condition I have ever seen a 
vessel. We have been running under full steam into a living gale 
of wind ever since we left the ice pack. We have had no sun for 
a week and our positions are only approximate. Our head gear 15 


386 LITTLE AMERICA 


so heavily iced up that at present we are looking for the first shelter 
to clear ship of ice. On the outside of her hull from the water 
line up there is approximately two feet of ice. Heavy pitching. 
We are hampered by heavy seas in our efforts to keep the ship 
clear of ice. The leak in the stern remains unchanged, but it is 
not serious. I am in full control of the situation and will advise 


you of any change. 
MELVILLE 


On the night of the 15th the situation reached a crisis. 
The men were worn out. Everything that could be spared 
had been thrown overboard to keep her afloat. The City was 
taking green water aboard every other roll. And Captain 
Melville, after a conference with Johansen, reached the con- 
clusion that unless shelter was gained before morning, they 
would be forced to run with the gale in search of shelter to 
clear ship. Johansen went on watch, and toward the end he 
made out land to the westward through a break in the clouds. 
It was the cone of Mt. Erebus, an active volcano, with a 
feathering vapor streaming from her crater; and the land 
which they sighted was Ross Island. They had been driven 
more than 300 miles off their course. Presently they could 
see to the westward the lower peaks of South Victoria Land. 
Melville edged the ship in toward the shelter, and in the mor- 
ning had her in the lee of the Barrier. Her decks were then 
nearly level with the sea, and her hull, rigging and spars were 
encased with a solid coating of ice which, in places, was three 
feet thick. More than 200 tons of ice lay above the water 
line of this 500 ton ship. That the City did not go down, I 
think, is due to the skill of Captain Melville and ice pilot 
Johansen, the courage and unswerving loyalty of her crew, 
and the stout heart of the old ship herself. 

We at Little America breathed a sigh of relief 
when Captain Melville reported, on the morning of the 16th, 
that the men were chopping the ship clear of ice, and he was 
proceeding eastward. 

Captain Brown had meanwhile started south from Dunedin, 
and such was his hurry to get into the fray that he started 
off without a pilot, and ran the Bolling ashore. “Sorry,” said 
Brownie. “Trying to save time. Expect to be off at to P.M.” 
They floated the Bolling off on the flood tide. She was un- 
damaged and Brown came south at once. 


DEATH OF A CITY 387 


Sunday 
February 16th 


Little America is about ready to pass out of existence. 

For the past eight days the sledges have been moving in a 
steady line to Floyd Bennett Bay. McKinley and Black have 
the stuff gathered in three piles. Nearly half the camp is now 
living there. Feury has built a mess hall from dog crates, and 
an upturned ski from the Ford serves as a mess table. Two 
lines of tents face each other, and with tons of gear piled be- 
hind them it is like a refugee camp. 

The ice has been moving rapidly lately, and the western 
edge is scarcely a hundred yards from the mouth of Floyd 
Bennett Harbor. It will make an excellent pier. 

McKinley has handled this thing very well. 

Winter cannot be far off. The temperature has been fall- 
ing steadily, and the Bay has been full of sea smoke for days. 
We shall get out just in time. And yet, with the end so near, 
I am rather sorry that it is over. I shall miss most of all the 
informal life and the understanding of men which only an 
expedition of this kind can bring out. Nowhere else can the 
qualities of friendship and unselfishness be so fully nurtured. 


Monday 
February 17th 


The City is making excellent time, with clear sky and open 
sea, although contending with a strong westerly set in the 
current. She will arrive some time tomorrow afternoon. 

The last things were moving out of Little America today. 
The camp is very quiet tonight—there are just a few here— 
the rest are at Floyd Bennett Bay. “Poc” Coman has remained, 
to keep watch over Mason. Mason is doing quite well, al- 
though in constant pain, and we have decided not to attempt to 
move him until the City is fully loaded and ready to go. 

His condition is really precarious. Dr. Coman does not 
think it will be necessary to operate. If it is some of us must 
make up our minds to remain here another year—Mason 
could not be moved for at least three weeks. 

It is a pity that we cannot take the airplanes. However, 
the aviation gang has anchored them securely on the top of a 
wind swept ridge about three-quarters of a mile to the east- 


388 LITTLE AMERICA 


ward of the camp. They faced the planes into the prevailing 
winds and we hope that they will not be buried by the snow 
for several years to come. 

The skis have been covered with snow blocks, the tail lifted 
and the wings set at a negative angle of attack. I don’t think 
the planes will come to harm. There is one advantage in this 
climate: where there is no melting there can be no rust. 

More ice went out of the western side of the Bay today, 
and the edge of it lips the mouth of Floyd Bennett Bay. The 
City can dock less than a mile from the piles of supplies. 

I cannot speak too highly of the dog drivers—Walden, 
Goodale, Crockett, Vaughan, Bursey and Blackburn. It is 
they who have borne the burden of transport from the be- 
ginning; and for the past week they have worked like demons. 
The trail is very soft and dangerous, with open pools of water, 
yet they have performed as efficiently as ever. 

Well, another twenty-four hours will tell the story. 


Tuesday 
February 18th 
Eight o’ clock 

The City is in. 

An hour ago—6:45 o’ clock P.M. to be exact—Melville 
radioed that the ship was in the Bay of Whales, making for 
the West Barrier. A few minutes later the camp at Floyd Ben- 
nett Harbor radioed she was in sight, her topmasts showing 
through a heavy mist. She came alongside the ice a few 
minutes ago, and June has begun to load her. 

The camp will be deserted in a few hours. I am remaining 
here to send a last few radio messages to the United States, 
which Petersen is handling. The last message from WFA 
will go to Mr. Adolph Ochs, publisher of the New York 
Times from the station named after him. 

The place has never been so quiet, nor has it seemed so 
large and barn-like. The bunks are empty and stripped of 
everything. The fire in the stove has gone out. Mason is 
curled up in a bunk and the “Doc” is talking quietly to him. 
Vaughan is sitting nearby. Ten miles away the loading is in 
full swing. In all frankness, I hate to see it end. 

McKinley lowered colors for the last time. There was 
only one of us there to salute them as they came down. 


DEATH OF A CITY 389 


Wednesday 
February roth 
At sea 


At 9:30 o'clock this morning Melville gave the order to 
cast off. The City nosed her way through loose ice in the 
Bay of Whales and then stood out to sea. We are now making 
our way along the Barrier, headed for Discovery Inlet. 

These last hours have been the most rushed of all. 

Early this morning, I came down to the ship on Vaughan’s 
sledge. As we rounded the point of Ver-sur-Mer Inlet, we 
met Blackburn on his way back to pick up Dr. Coman and 
Mason. The air was quite raw and cold, with the hint of fog 
in it. We saw the City moored alongside the bay ice, and the 
loaded dog teams scurrying between it and the camp in Floyd 
Bennett Harbor. I met Captain Melville and congratulated 
him on bringing the ship through. The City still bore the 
marks of her struggle. Her bow, rigging and decks were still 
swathed in ice, and the sheathing was scarred where heavy 
does had struck her. 

McKinley, Gould, June and Black had the loading problem 
well in hand. They had been working all night, and most of 
the important records and scientific equipment were already 
aboard. All hands pitched in, and the supplies marched up 
the wooden plankings in a steady stream. 

Taylor and the dogs, which he had brought down were 
more than helpful in the rush of loading. 

At 9:30 o'clock the last piece was put aboard. Then the 
dogs were released from the sledges and taken on the ship, 
as were the penguins which we hope to bring back alive to the 
United States. We cast off. 

Now that we have started the Antarctic is showing its most 
beautiful side. The sun is shining, lighting up the Barrier 
cliffs, bringing out its lovely blue shadows and tints. It 
seems to say: “You see, I am not half so bad as I am painted.” 

We are passing through slush and pancake ice. The Bay’ 
of Whales was freezing as we left. In another week, I think, 
we would have been there to stay—at least until another year 
had passed. All hands are stowing gear below decks and 
securing the deck cargo. | 

We shall attempt a passage of the pack at the 178th merid- 


390 LITTLE AMERICA 


ian. The Larsen, after penetrating the pack for twenty miles, 
has withdrawn because of heavy ice and the difficulty of 
maneuvering. She is heavily loaded. The City was indeed 
fortunate to get through. 


Thursday 
February 20th 


We took our departure from Discovery Inlet early this 
morning, and our noon position was approximately 50 miles 
northwest of it. The Bolling has reached the edge of the pack, 
and is now standing by the Kosmos. 

Weather continues good. We are meeting patches of new 
ice. 


Tuesday 
February 25th 


Last night we dogged through scattered fragments of the 
pack. It is much farther south than we had expected to 
find it. However, it is quite light and we are making excellent 
time. If luck is with us, we shall meet the whalers tomorrow. 
We are heading for the Kosmos and the Bolling. 

I am desperately anxious about Mason, whose condition has 
not improved. If it becomes necessary to operate on him 
aboard the City, he hasn’t a chance in a thousand to survive. 

Our noon position was Lat. 70° S., Long. 178° E. 


Wednesday 
February 26th 


We are out of the pack at last. It was tough going for a 
while—but really not bad. Recent southerly winds had massed 
a lot of ice against the southern edge of the pack. This was 
thick enough to impede us considerably—in fact, stopped us 
once altogether. Then a walloping 35-mile wind came out of 
the south, and literally pushed us through. We set all sails, 
and with the wind behind us plowed through, gaining an 
open lead. Later the City averaged as high as five knots 
going through rotten ice, patches of which are at least four 
feet thick. 


When night fell, the ship hove to. The lead we were fol- 


DEAT TOR A CITY 391 


lowing had narrowed down and rather than run the risk of 
crashing against a heavy floe in the darkness we decided to 
wait until daybreak before continuing. In the morning con- 
ditions were much better, and the northern edge of the pack 
was made up of loose floes. We turned westward and are 
making for the Kosmos. 

There has been no sun for several days, and we are pro- 
ceeding by dead reckoning.. The slush was freezing behind us 
as we quit the pack. 


Friday 
February 28th 


Homeward bound. 

Early this morning we came alongside the Kosmos and 
transferred Mason and Taylor’s dogs. The Bolling was 
nearby. I cannot describe how strange it was to see new 
faces after these many months. 

Poor Mason went up in a basket operated by a winch, and 
after him went the dogs. One crate fell between two ships, 
but the dogs were saved. The sea was quite rough, and we 
used a couple of dead whales as bumpers between the two 
ships. The odor was simply terrible. 

I paid my regards to Captain Andresen and to Dr. Barnes, 
who, in volunteering to serve aboard the Kosmos is living 
up to the best traditions of the expedition. The Kosmos has 
excellent hospital facilities and Mason is certain of good care. 

A heavy swell was running and we had a most difficult 
time to find water smooth enough to permit the Bolling to 
come alongside. We tried it first in the lee of a huge iceberg 
but the water was much too rough and we were finally forced 
to enter heavy pack which was quite dangerous to the unpro- 
tected rudder posts of the Bolling. However, the sea was 
quieter there. 

The journey is almost run. In a few days we shall see 
Dunedin and our friends. Then home. The mission is done, 
and well, I hope . . . I hope it sincerely, principally for these 
men who have gone each step of the way with me. They have 
given two years of their lives to the service of science, a hard 
and grudging master, and it would be a pity if their sacrifice 
were neither understood nor appreciated. 


392 LITTLE AMERICA 


To what is already written I can add little more. There is 
the wish, however, to restate our debt to the men who showed 
the way in the Antarctic—to Scott, Shackleton, Amundsen, 
Mawson, and the rest of that fine company. There is the 
wish also to put an end, once and for all, to the journalistic 
practice of referring to our efforts as the “conquest” of the 
Antarctic. / The Antarctic has not been conquered. At best we 
simply toré away a bit more of the veil which conceals its 
secrets. An immense job yet remains to be done. The Ant- 
arctic will yield to no single expedition, nor yet to half a dozen. 
In its larger aspects, it still remains, and will probably remain 
for TAR years to come, one of the great undone tasks of the 
world. 


CHAPTER XVII


THE GEOLOGICAL SLEDGE TRIP 


By Dr. Laurence M. GOULD 


In his original plans for sledging operations southward 
from Little America, Admiral Byrd had expected to have the 
dog teams proceed directly south to the Queen Maud Range at 
the foot of Axel Heiberg Glacier. En route they were to estab- 
lish bases that could be used by the airplanes for flights to the 
east or west as well as over the pole. The loss of the Fokker 
on the geological trip to the Rockefeller Mountains during the 
first season of operations necessarily curtailed the work that 
could be done by airplane. Of all places of interest, both 
geologically and geographically, the Queen Maud Mountains, 
especially at their junction with the supposed Carmen Land, 
had first place. With the loss of the Fokker it was impossible 
for the geologist to have a plane at his disposal to reach these 
fields of activity. Consequently it was decided to have the 
southern sledging trip provide the means for geological and 
geographical research in this section as well as to lay bases for 
possible use by the airplanes. The designation of the party 
was then changed to the Geological Sledging Party under the 
leadership of the expedition geologist. 

To reach the places desired by the geologist it was neces- 
sary to plan for a much longer sledge trip than had been 
originally visioned. These plans were consummated and the 
long trip was made possible only because of the excellent co- 
operation of the Supporting Party whose work has been else- 
where described. 

A large part of the winter was consumed in making plans 
and completing preparations for the trip. To understand the 
reasons for the success of the trip, a knowledge of these prepa- 
rations is essential. The first thing to occupy our attention 


393 


394 LITTLE AMERICA 


was, of course, food; and, with the assistance of Dr. Coman, 
we worked out the following very generous ration: 


Foop DAILY RATIONS PER MAN 
Pemmican © OZ. 
Biscuits toga 
bupag A Ms 
Powdered milk yat. 
Oatmeal yo ChY3 
Soup rolls (Erbswurst) 2 dau 
Chocolate „Uya 
Tea ay 
Salt 25 + 


The above items were the essential constituents of our ra- 
tion, but in addition, more or less as delicacies for occasional 
use to add variety, we included: 


Butter .59 02. 
Peanut butter ob 
Bacop I.33 “ 
Cocoa nu3“ 
Malted milk E, et 


The greatest innovation in She above is oatmeal. It was 
necessary in preparing rations for such a lengthy trip to take 
food that needed little or no cooking, in view of the fact that 
our entire fuel supply had to be carried with us. We did 
some experiments during the winter and found that a vacuum 
jug made an excellent fireless cooker, and that it was only 
necessary to bring the oatmeal to a boil and put it into the jug 
after supper to find it well cooked by morning. Furthermore, 
after breakfast we filled the jug with hot tea so that we could 
make our noonday stop and have a hot drink without lighting 
a fire. This system worked out well, and throughout the sum- 
mer we had two bowls of hot oatmeal and milk for breakfast 
with two cups of hot tea and a biscuit: for lunch, two cups of 
tea, a 4 oz. bar of chocolate and two biscuits: for supper, two 
or three bowls of rich stew made of pemmican and soup rolls, 
four biscuits and two cups of tea. The other items in our 
rations were used from time to time by way of variety. 

For a cooker we used an adaptation of the Nansen cooker 


THE GEOLOGICAL SLEDGE TRIP 395 


designed and built by Victor Czegka, the machinist. For the 
standard one burner primus, a two burner arrangement was 
substituted. I dare say no one has ever used a more efficient 
stove than this one. 

Of almost equal importance to our own food, was that of 
the dogs. It was a rare bit of good fortune that Dr. Malcolm, 
Professor of Chemistry at Otago University in Dunedin, New 
Zealand, interested himself in our behalf. He designed a 
pemmican that represented a correctly balanced diet which the 
dogs liked and on which they thrived throughout the trip. 

Little need be said about our personal equipment, for it did 
not differ essentially from that used by Admiral Byrd and 
others who went far afield by air. 

The sledges came in for a good deal of alteration. We 
planned to have five dog teams of nine dogs each with each 
team hauling two sledges in tandem. When we finally left 
Little America we used for lead sledges, one single-ended flex- 
ible sledge, two double-ended flexible sledges, and two double- 
ended rigid freight sledges such as had been used so success- 
fully in transporting supplies from the ships to Little America. 
For the second or trailer sledges we used much lighter types, 
two single-ended sledges supplied by Amundsen and three 
sledges with runners made from skis. We found the rigid 
freight sledges heavy and cumbersome to handle on the trail, 
and as our Joads lightened these were the first sledges we aban- 
doned. In every particular for use on the trail we found the 
flexible type—that is one bound together by rawhide thongs— 
superior. All of these flexible sledges which we used were 
lashed together by Strom and Balchen, and the two double- 
ended lead sledges were entirely constructed by them. I do 
not think that any explorers have had better sledges than these 
two. 

In addition to the expected amount of camp gear, ropes 
and materials for making repairs, we carried a moving picture 
camera and six thousand feet of film, two still cameras with 
an abundance of film, a radio receiver and transmitter with 
hand generator, and flags for marking the trail. 

We planned to mark the trail at half mile intervals with 
small orange flags. Surmounting each depot of dog food, 
man food and fuel to be laid down at fifty mile intervals from 


396 LITTLE AMERICA 


Little America to the foot of the Queen Maud Mountains, 
was to be a large flag. Furthermore a line of trail flags, 
spaced at one-fourth mile intervals, was to be placed to the 
east and west of the depots for a distance of five miles. The 
flag sticks thus set out were to be numbered serially beginning 
with one and proceeding away from the depot on either side. 
Flags to the east to have a capital E together with the appro- 
priate number, while those to the west were to have a W with 
appropriate number. Thus a flag stick marked with W-2 
would be eight flags or two miles west of the depot. For the 
first 200 miles of the trip southward, which ended with depot 
No. 4, this system of marking the trail and laying depots was 
carried out by the Supporting Party. 

As our plans stood completed we planned to sledge directly 
south from Little America to the foot of the Queen Maud 
Mountains, where we would establish a base where Admiral 
Byrd could make a cache of gasoline and oil for refueling on 
the polar flight. After the polar flight we planned to scale 
Mt. Nansen, if possible, and then sledge eastward along the 
foot of the range, at least as far as Carmen Land. We were 
then to return to our base camp, established when we reached 
the mountains, and follow our trail back toward Little America 
as far as depot No. 5 at latitude 82° 35’ south. We then pro- 
posed to leave the trail and head northeast to investigate 
Amundsen’s recorded appearances of land, after which we 
would return to our main trail at depot No. 3, and then back 
to Little America. 

Neither the Supporting Party nor the Geological Party 
found any evidence of this land on their way south. On his 
first flight south to lay a cache of gasoline and oil for the polar 
flight, Admiral Byrd found that there was no land whatever 
showing toward the east. The Geological Party therefore 
naturally abandoned its plan to leave the main trail when home- 
ward bound. Otherwise the plans as outlined above were car- 
ried out. 

By the middle of October both sledging parties were ready 
to depart. On the morning of October 15, 1929, the Support- 
ing Party took its final departure. We decided to go along 
with them for a few days, just by way of testing out our own 
equipment and to have our heavy loads at least a few miles 


THE GEOLOGICAL SLEDGE TRIP 307 


under way when we took our final departure. In my own un- 
enlightened eagerness to be of use, I attempted, with my skis 
on, to drive Mike Thorne’s team. The results were disastrous. 
My skis became entangled with dogs and sledges. I was so 
badly bruised as a result that I brought my own party back to 
Little America from only 20 miles out. Two days after our 
return to Little America the five dog teams departed again on 
what we termed the 100 mile trip. I remained in camp to re- 
cuperate. They moved our heavy loads out to depot No. 2, 
100 miles south of Little America, and then returned to Little 
America, arriving on October 28th. 

Some seven days were consumed in making desired altera- 
tions in our equipment and giving the dogs a good rest. Finally 
on November 4th everything was ready for our final departure. 
There were six of us—Frederick E. Crockett, dog driver and 
radio operator; Edward E. Goodale, dog driver; George A. 
Thorne, dog driver and topographer; J. S. O’Brien, dog driver 
and surveyor; Norman D. Vaughan, dog driver and in general 
charge of all the dogs; and myself ip the rôle of navigator, 
cook, and of course geologist. 

It was a dull gray day with overcast sky—at one P. m.— 
that we took our departure. 

The first 100 miles, of course, were dead easy, for my com- 
panions had previously advanced our heavy sledge load to that 
point. From here south it was hard work. Little need be said 
about our travel to depot No. 4, established by the Supporting 
Party at 81° 43’, for they had traversed and marked this part 
of our route ahead of us. Their difficulties in crossing the 
badly crevassed area between 81° south and depot No. 4 have 
been described. The fact that they preceded us and marked 
the trail made our crossing relatively easy. Recrossing this 
area two months later on our homeward trip was, however, a 
different story. 

We arrived at depot No. 4, the last outpost of She Support- 
ing Party, on November 17th. From here on our work be- 
came heavier, and the dogs had already all the load they should 
haul. Yet somehow we had to carry on from here at least 500 
pounds of dog food. We loaded it onto our sledges, and on 
the morning of November 18th we started southward pioneer- 


ing our way. 


398 LITTLE AMERICA 


We had long since learned that the dogs keep a straighter 
course if someone leads the trail ahead. George Thorne, or 
Mike, as we all called him, was eminently fitted to lead the 
way. Thus we travelled with Mike ahead, immediately I came 
driving his team so that I could watch the compass on the 
sledge and call ahead to him as necessary, “right,” “left” or 
“steady.” He had such a good sense of direction that he 
needed but little steering from me. 

This first day with the additional loads was a dishearten- 
ing one. Everybody was tugging at ropes tied to the sledges 
trying to help the dogs along, and Mike and Norman even 
carried heavy packs on their backs, Even so we travelled but 
8 miles. The mountains seemed infinitely far away that night. 
Our sense of slowness in travel was further accentuated that 
day, for just after noon we suddenly heard behind and above 
us an unfamiliar and unexpected roar. We looked up to see 
the Floyd Bennett soaring over us southward bound to lay a 
cache of gasoline, oil and food for use on the polar flight. A 
sharper contrast between the old and the new methods of travel 
could hardly be pictured. Here was Commander Byrd and his 
party covering in four hours a distance which took us four 
weeks to cover with our dogs. 

November 19th we travelled 12 miles, and the dogs were 
so utterly tired out that we deemed it best to give them a holi- 
day. Accordingly we let them rest the 20th. This was a good 
idea. From now on things began to go better. And from here 
on to the mountains we travelled along without greatly fearing 
but that we should be able to make our goal. 

From the crevassed area to the mountains the Barrier is 
quite flat and unbroken. The following entries from my log 
describe typical days over this part of our journey: “Xoy. 21. 
Fairly good surface this morning—few low sastrugi but well 
coated over. Overcast but with fair visibility this morning. 
Became steadily worse and at to o'clock a light snowfall began. 
The horizon promptly disappeared, and we are in that sort of 
milky light when every direction—up, down, left, right—all 
look alike. One could not even distinguish the snow surface 
at his feet. One had the curious sensation of being suspended 
in a world of opaque white. I became fairly dizzy watching 
the compass and then looking up to see if Mike was on the 


THE GEOLOGICAL SLEDGE TRIP 399 


course. I would level my eyes toward him and then find him 
up above me 45 degrees, so it seemed.” 

“November 25. Rough sastrugi which we had to cross 
diagonally and which made the compass bound about badly 
and steering, therefore, difficult. As is always the case, these 
sastrugi trend in an ESE to WNW direction. We were sure 
at noon that at last we could see the long sought for moun- 
tains. Shortly after noon, the southerly haze lifted and there 
to the southwest, but still very far away, was a grand escarp- 
ment of snow covered peaks, nothing dead ahead, By four 
o’clock we could distinguish a huge mountain mass almost 
dead ahead of us. This we believe to be Mt. Nansen. It has 
been a stimulating afternoon after the almost unchanging 
travel for the past three weeks over the sastrugi surface of 
the Barrier.” | 

“November 27. Twenty-five to thirty miles of wind this 
morning with heavy drift, but we would have gone on anyhow 
but that we were requested to wait until ope p. m. for radio 
schedule with Little America to advise them about the weather, 
since they were in readiness to take off for the polar flight. 
Even so we broke camp immediately the schedule was over and 
were under way by three o’clock. 

“The mountains have drawn much nearer today, so much 
so that it is hard to believe that they are still 50 miles away. 
Perfect weather this afternoon with only about 5 miles of 
wind, made the mountains stand out especially clearly. We 
could see a great gap in the solid wall of rock, which we believe 
to be Axel Heiberg Glacier, and we have already altered our 
course to steer directly toward it. (Later we were to learn 
that it was Liv’s Glacier and not Axel Heiberg toward which 
we were steering.) 

“The weather has been perfect since noon, Nothing better 
could be hoped for for the polar flight, but we learn that it is 
still cloudy and windy at Little America.” 

“On the morning of the 28th I sent a message to Com- 
mander Byrd to the effect that the sky was cloudless, that the 
barometer was high, that there was no wind, and that this 
looked like the day. 

“Tt was the day. We remained in camp or stood by for the 
flight, listening in by radio ready to start with our dog teams 


400 LITTLE AMERICA 


to the rescue should the plane have a forced landing. We were 
not needed, but we did get a real thrill when the Floyd Bennett, 
poleward bound, zoomed over us and dropped us a parachuted 
load of films, messages and cigarettes. 

“November 29. Shortly after 9 o’clock, when we learned 
that the Floyd Bennett had landed at Little America, we broke 
camp and were under way again. 

“The mountains stood out clearly and beautifully, and we 
continued to head directly for the great break which we at first 
thought was Axel Heiberg glacier, but which we are now con- 
vinced is Liv’s. The mountains draw perceptibly nearer and it 
looks very much as though we would surely reach them to- 
morrow. 

“November 30. The mountains looked so near that we 
decided to make them or bust—it came very near being the 
latter. We travelled 35 miles over the toughest going we have 
ever had, which was complicated by a twenty mile wind from 
the SE with heavy drifting snow that stung our faces and 
pushed us about where the surface became icy near the moun- 
tains. Fifteen miles away from the mountains the Barrier was 
pushed up into icy covered ridges by the ice flowing out of the 
glaciers, and the whole was cut up by a series of great, almost 
parallel crevasses, miles in length, that crossed our course 
diagonally. We crossed numberless ones—great huge ones— 
little ones—open and closed ones—bridges falling in as we 
hurried across. 

“Individual dogs always tumbling in, and occasionally part 
of a team would fall through and begin to fight amongst them- 
selves, and then again a sledge would break through. 

“As we neared the mountains the surface became icy, and 
it became increasingly difficult to keep straight on skis and 
manage the sledges, but we are camped tonight at the foot of 
Liv’s Glacier in the very shadow of Mt. Nansen. Very tired 
after the long trek, but even if I were not I should need much 
more poetic felicity of expression than I can muster to give 
any notion of the sublime sight ahead of us—a mighty range 
of mountains from ten to fifteen thousand feet high, rising 
sheer from the Ross Barrier, which at their feet are less than 
300 feet above sea level. We already feel repaid for the long 
hard days of travel behind us—up every morning from 5:30 to 


ausoy y 28.09 Ka Aeasng 
298) u3uopolo a ovcha © 
500/308 Kaan, | e 
synod pecshlapap o3kuoyodvy a 

be oG 3umy y9-9709p00937 "91202733 
shyy ON pod WT) 4p9 do auloy - 


9 a 9 $ 

M u 3aush 913235 

mosha3axe emochylmy anlya 

3H1 30 - 

y (atpoo ‘u 3on3upyt cha u3ama) 

la nya 9400213 4v91901049 
ani 30 

SNOILVUadO 40 97313 

\ 40 yy 


y 00 
u: y po 


"ows 4 
aere: a 


- 


50/6 d0 p. 


98 


X. 


THE GEOLOGICAL SLEDGE TRIP 401 


6 o'clock, with temperatures from 5 to 30 degrees below zero, 
start the primus stove to thaw out our food and melt snow for 
powdered milk and for tea. Then the dead quiet (provided 
the dogs have not begun to stir about) of the Barrier air is dis- 
turbed as I howl, ‘Breakfast! Norman, Eddie, Freddie, Mike, 
Obie.’ Then breakfast of oatmeal, steaming hot from the 
vacuum jug, with plenty of rich milk and sugar, then two cups 
of tea and a biscuit. Breakfast over, great haste to get under 
way as soon as possible. We stop at noon for a few minutes 
rest and for two cups of hot tea from the vacuum jug, two 
biscuits, a bar of chocolate, and a small piece of pemmican. 
We mush on again until we think the dogs have gone far 
enough, halt, pitch our tents, picket and feed the dogs. While 
the others are busy attending to the dogs I am busy getting 
supper of thick pemmican stew, three biscuits with bacon fat, 
og, op rare occasions, butter and two cups of tea, and then into 
our fur sleeping bags. But now all that is changed, and a 
month, full of opportunity, lies right before us.” 

Thus far in our travels we had concentrated entirely on the 
business of getting to the mountains. Now we were ready to 
go to work. There were two major tasks ahead of us. We 
wanted to map or chart as great areas of the Queen Maud 
Mountains as we could, and here before us lay a veritable 
paradise for a geologist. Naturally I wanted as much time as 
possible to devote to my geological and geographical studies. 
We made a division of labor with George (Mike) Thorne and 
Jack O’Brien assigned to the task of mapping while I was freed 
to devote myself to my own particular interests. I assisted 
with the mapping to the extent of doing the navigating and 
making all the astronomical observations. In the following 
weeks nothing seemed to please Mike so much as to stand 
around with his compass on a jacob staff or with the theodolite 
shooting angles on peaks and glaciers. He was tireless, and it 
was principally due to his industry that we were able to bring 
back so complete a map of our travels in and along the front 
ranges of the Queen Maud Mountains. | 

We spent three days exploring the lower part of Liv’s 
Glacier and the surrounding mountains. We immediately saw 
the necessity of getting well into the mountains beyond the 
foothills if we were to reach the rocks that beld the key to the 


402 LITTLE AMERICA 


geology. These foothills were composed entirely of the old 
pre-Cambrian rocks, the very oldest rocks we know, while the 
higher mountains farther south were seen to have their lower 
portions of old pre-Cambrian rocks overlain by some kind of 
flat-lying rocks that appeared to be arranged in layers. If these 
layers turned out to be sedimentary then we should be able to 
unravel in part the geological story of this great mountain 
range. 

We had hoped to be able to get at these higher mountains 
by way of Liv’s Glacier, but we found it so steep and so badly 
crevassed that we were scarcely able to climb it on foot even 
when shod with crampons. We therefore left this, our first 
mountain camp, and came along the foot of the range to the 
southeast and camped on the lower part of what Amundsen 
indicates on his chart as the western portion of Axel Heiberg 
Glacier. We established our mountain base here and called it 
Strom Camp, and immediately set to work making prepara- 
tions for our projected trips into the mountains and eastward. 
The most important part of our preparations consisted of tak- 
ing an accurate inventory of our dog and man food and basing 
our plans on the amount of food available. 

Our first field work necessitated ascending the glacier to get 
at the rocks that capped Mt. Nansen, which lay at the head of 
it. We left Strom Camp on December 6th and sledged four- 
teen miles up the glacier and camped as near as we could to the 
rocks which I wanted to reach. The flanks of Mt. Nansen 
were encased in ice which in part pulls away from the rock 
faces to leave great crevasses which made the ascent to the 
rocks somewhat uncertain. 

The next day Mike Thorne, Ed Goodale, Freddie Crockett, 
and I started out on skis to climb the steep slope above our 
camp and thread our way, if possible, among the crevasses to 
the rocks which were our goal. We dared not attempt to 
climb about here other than on skis for fear of falling into 
crevasses, and in my log for December 7th, I find the day 
described as follows: 

“Climbed on skis up saddle between two spurs on southern 
slope of Mt. Nansen—very steep and difficult with a small ice 
falls half way up, a series of crevasses transverse to our course 
from one to eight or eleven feet in width, but usually roofed 


THE GEOLOGICAL SLEDGE TRIP 403 


over. We roped to climb and ‘herringboned’ and ‘sidebilled’ 
our way up on our skis. Had to climb even steeper slope 
beyond these first crevasses to reach the coveted rocks—a bit 
hazardous this, for we were climbing along a steep side hill, 
and some 200 feet below us, paralleling our course, was a 
great yawning chasm. 

“The snow was crusted over, and it was hard to make our 
skis stick, but we finally reached our rocks, the very rocks that 
I wanted most to find in the Antarctic. We became so inter- 
ested in our rock collecting that none of us noted the changing 
weather. Quite suddenly we were completely engulfed and 
could see nothing of our surroundings. We hastened to put 
on our skis, hoping we would be able to retrace our steps. 
Then it began to snow, and we began to get a bit nervous. We 
hurriedly roped and began our descent. 

“Mike is an expert on skis, but for the rest of us the down 
going was more difficult than the ascent. We slipped and fell 
time after time, knowing the big open crevasse was a few feet 
below us, got up, swallowed our hearts, and skidded on again. 
Fortunately the snowfall was not sufficient to cover our tracks, 
and when we had cleared the first steep slope the clouds lifted 
enough so we could see our way across the worst of the cre- 
vasses. Then came the steep, uncrevassed slope with which we 
began our climb. Here we could take off our awkward ropes. 
Mike slid grandly down the hill and Freddie Crockett did 
pretty well following him, but as for Ed Goodale and me, 
after trying with great difficulty to sidehill our way down, we 
finally sat down on our skis and disgracefully slid to the 
bottom.” 

This was really one of the worst days of the whole sum- 
mer, and not the least significant of the thrills was the realiza- 
tion that the flat lying rocks that cap Mt. Nansen were a great 
series of sandstones, containing toward their top seams of 
impure coaly material. This discovery definitely establishes 
the fact that we are here dealing with precisely the same moun- 
tain structure as those known and studied by British geologists 
along the western borders of the Ross Sea. In other words 
the structure of the sandstone demonstrates that Mt. Nansen 
is part of a great uplifted fault block system of mountains, 
that takes its rise more than a thousand miles away toward the 


404 LITTLE AMERICA 


west and north. Furthermore the presence of the low grade 
coaly material on Mt. Nansen greatly increases the limits of 
the coal field that is believed to underlie a large part of the 
Antarctic Plateau. 

It was also on this first day’s climb that Ed Goodale found 
lichens on one of the rocks. It was an interesting find for it 
was the farthest south at which indigenous life of any sort had 
ever been found. We were later to find greater growths of 
lichens even farther south than this. 

On the 8th of December we moved farther westward to get 
at another spur of Mt. Nansen, and Norman Vaughan, Ed 
Goodale, Mike and I climbed again to the rocks—up ice faces 
where we had to chop our steps and over ragged pinnacled 
columns of dolerite—lots of fun and amazingly interesting 
rocks. 

Another day’s work about this side of Mt. Nansen, and 
then we headed back down the glacier to make preparations for 
our trip eastward along the foot of the range. What a riot it 
is driving the dog teams down the steep slopes of the glacier. 
The sledges are rough-locked, that is, ropes are put around the 
runners to prevent their sliding easily, and then the driver yells 
“yaKe” and tries to keep his team from getting too near another 
one and away from any chance crevasses. 

Coming down Norm’s team and Eddie’s got too close to- 
gether and mixed in one grand fight. I was sliding grandly 
along between the sledges. Immediately the fight commenced, 
and purely from the standpoint of self preservation, I tried to 
stop, but instead I slid right into the middle of the mélée and 
in trying to extricate myself from the jam without getting 
bitten I parted the dogs and have not yet confessed to the 
drivers that I did not deliberately set out to separate the dogs 
for them. T am such an awkward dog driver anyhow, that 
when I make a grand splurge like this one I hate to confess 
that it was accidental. 

Before returning to Strom Camp we climbed what we be- 
lieved to be Mt. Betty, both to make a search for a cache left 
there by Amundsen eighteen years ago, and to get a look up 
the eastern part of Axel Heiberg Glacier. We failed to find 
the cache and did not get much of a view of Axel Heiberg. 
We returned to our base camp to make ready for our proposed 


THE GEOLOGICAL SLEDGE TRIP 405 


eastern trip. On the 12th Ed Goodale and I made a successful 
search for the cache of food and gasoline laid down by Admiral 
Byrd before the polar flight. We brought the food back to 
camp and were glad to have it, for it gave us a great margin 
of safety for carrying out our plans without taking too long 
chances. 

On the morning of the 13th—and it was Friday too—we 
started on our eastern trip. To our left the Barrier was heavily 
blanketed with clouds, but it was brilliant sunny weather over 
the mountains, and what a setting for our start! Ahead and 
disappearing toward the east a great range of mountains un- 
known and unexplored—fifteen miles away and to our right 
was Mt. Nansen in all his Glory. A great sight is this moun- 
tain, dignified and grand as befits anything named for such 
a man as Fridtjof Nansen. 

We camped part way up Axel Heiberg Glacier with Mt. 
Ruth Gade towering above us—a fairy land setting in this 
world of white in the brilliant sun. How different it was the 
next morning—sky overcast and snow beginning to fall. For 
three days we were snowbound, with a fall of sixteen inches 
of soft wet snow, and so warm that it melted on everything 
it touched. We were wet and, of course, very cold, much 
colder than we had been at 25 below when we could keep dry. 

Time hung heavy on our hands. When we left Little 
America each man was allowed to bring one book, but of 
course these had been left at Strom Camp when we started 
eastward. Someone had brought a pack of cards, so we played 
hearts with our daily issue of chocolate for stakes. How differ- 
ent our camp looked when the sun finally came back. The dogs, 
as they lay curled in the snow, had melted themselves down 
into wells. They were half buried, and the tents, sagging under 
their load, reminded one of evergreens at home with their 
branches sagging after a heavy fall of wet snow. 

On the 7th when the sun returned, we dug ourselves out 
and were under way again—very heavy sledging and skiing. 
Directly ahead of us the surface was so badly crevassed that 
we had to head out into the Barrier to go eastward. We made 
frequent stops for Obie and Mike to do their surveying. About 
two o’clock on the 18th we saw that we were coming to a 
great ice field and decided to turn sharply to our right and 


406 LITTLE AMERICA 


go into the mountains and climb up for a look around. We 
camped at the foot of an interesting looking ridge up which 
we climbed 2,000 feet after supper. An observation later 
showed this to be our farthest south, 85° 27’, and even here 
as at Mt. Nansen we found lichens on the rocks, the farthest 
south that life has yet been found. 

The mountains here were composed entirely of the old pre- 
Cambrian gneisses, schists and granites, the very oldest rocks 
known. There was no cap rock of sandstone. The great 
sheets of ice that had at some not very remote geological time 
covered all these mountains, had long since carried it all away. 
But any rocks are of interest to the geologist—and all the 
members of the party had by this time become amateur geolo- 
gists—so of course they were ever on the outlook for minerals. 
In general these old rocks were quite barren of interesting 
minerals. It was about this camp that were found some copper 
bearing rocks but not in sufficient quantity to suggest any 
extensive deposits. 

We looked out away from the mountains and to the east, 
and the surface was ice as far as we could see. But we had 
decided to go eastward, at least as far as Marie Byrd Land 
which begins at the 150th meridian. In my log for the 19th 
I find that “We headed out to avoid the ice, but it was no use 
—soon became so bad that we couldn’t stand on our skis but 
had to take them off and hang onto the sledges. Ice was fairly 
smooth at first, but after two hours travelling we found our- 
selves in an area that had been much crevassed. Fortunately 
most of the crevasses were not of great extent, but they 
gave us some nasty spills nevertheless. We had to play a sort 
of game of tag with them. We could see them easily enough, 
for they were in part bridged with snow, whereas the rest of 
the ice was swept clean. But seeing the crevasses and avoiding 
them were two different matters. 

“It was almost impossible to guide the sledges or make 
the dogs go where we wanted them to go. The dogs have 
gotten pretty smart about crossing crevasses and have learned 
that their best chance of keeping out is to head straight across 
them. But once they are across they forget that a change in 
their course may pull the sledge into the very hole they have 
been able to avoid. So we often crashed into them with our 


THE GEOLOGICAL SLEDGE TRIP 407 


sledges. Wrecked one of our best sledges and had to abandon 
it and badly damaged the runners on the others. We had to 
travel 25 miles before we could find a patch of snow big 
enough to anchor our tents on.” 

It was the same thing over again the next day, but most of 
the time we were going down hill so we made another 25 
miles to find ourselves well to the east of the t5o meridian 
—in Marie Byrd Land—on American soil here in the Ant- 
arctic. 

Here again we found the same old rocks that form the 
base of all the mountains and constitute all of the mountains 
except the great high ones around Axel Heiberg Glacier, where 
these old rocks are overlain by the sandstone. Hege also we 
found the same fault block structure. 

Looking back over the route we have come and the areas 
we have mapped it is interesting to note that eastward from 
Mt. Alice W. the mountains are much lower and continue so 
as far east as we could see. The highest peaks in Marie 
Byrd Land do not exceed 5000 feet, while Mt. Ruth Gade 
beside Axel Heiberg Glacier is 15,000 feet. This eastern part 
of our mountains is also characterized by greater glaciers than 
Axel Heiberg or Liv’s. We charted three great valley or outlet 
glaciers that should be classed along with the Beardmore which 
is the largest valley glacier so far known any place in the 
world. 

While Mike was busy finishing his mapping the rest of us 
climbed the nearest mountain. We called this one Supporting 
Party Mountain. It was our farthest point from Little 
America and we had been able to reach it only because of the 
good work of the Supporting Party. We built a cairn on top 
of the mountain. In this cairn will be found a page from my 
notebook with the following note thereon. 


“Dec. 21st, 1929 
Camp Francis Dana Coman 
Da 261753 
147 55 W | 
Marie Byrd Land, Antarctica 
“This note the farthest east point reached by the Geological 
Party of the Byrd Antarctic Expedition. We are beyond or 


408 LITTLE AMERICA 


east of the 15oth meridian, and therefore in the name of 
Commander Richard Evelyn Byrd claim this land as a part of 
Marie Byrd Land, a dependency or possession of the United 
States of America. We are not only the first Americans but 
the first individuals of any nationality to set foot on American 
soil in the Antarctic. This extended sledge journey from 
little America has been made possible by the cooperative work 
of the Supporting Party composed of Arthur Walden, leader; 
Christopher Braathen; Jack Bursey; and Joe de Ganahl. Our 
Geological Party is composed of: 


L. M. Gould, leader and geologist 

N. D. Vaughan, dog driver 

G. A. Thorne, topographer 

E. E. Goodale, dog driver 

E. E. Crockett, dog driver and radio operator 
J. $. O’Brien, civil engineer.” 


When I had collected all the rocks I thought we could carry 
and Mike had finished locating his mountains and glaciers 
we were ready to start back toward Strom Camp. The essen- 
tial part of our scientific work was finished. We had mapped 
175 miles of the front ranges of the Queen Maud Mountains, 
we had demonstrated that this great fault block mountain sys- 
tem is continued almost due eastward from Axel Heiberg 
Glacier for more than a hundred miles, we had demonstrated 
that there is no such highland as Amundsen thought he saw 
and called Carmen Land, and furthermore we had helped to 
push the known limits of the Ross Shelf Ice more than one 
hundred miles east than they had been known to exist by the 
base laying flight made by Commander Byrd. 

Westward bound toward Strom Camp we found recrossing 
the glacial ice almost as much of a nightmare as it had been 
the first time we had crossed. Otherwise the return journey 
was devoid of special happenings until we camped Christmas 
Day at the foot of Mt. Betty. We had determined to make a 
last thorough search of this mountain for the Amundsen cache, 
for there was no other place that would fit Amundsen’s descrip- 
tion of Mt. Betty. As we broke camp, Mike and I skied ahead 
down to a ridge where we thought we saw something that 
looked like a cairn of rocks. It was. 


THE GEOLOGICAL SLEDGE TRIP 409 


We signalled the dog teams to come along. What a thrill 
we did all get on this Christmas Day to stand where Amundsen 
had once stood and to find, perfectly intact, the cairn he had 
erected eighteen years before. We couldn’t help standing at 
attention, with hats off, in admiring respect for the memory of 
this remarkable man before we touched a rock of the cairn. 
It was one of the most exciting moments of the summer when 
I pried the lid off the tin can in the cairn and took out a bit 
of paper which had formerly been a page in Amundsen’s note- 
book, and on which he had briefly recounted his discovery of 
the South Pole. 

Back in Strom Camp again on the 26th. I had wanted 
to make one more journey into the mountains but the dogs were 
too tired. We had to give them a few days rest before we 
began our long trek northward to Little America. We care- 
fully overhauled our gear and discarded pretty much every- 
thing except our instruments, our food, and my rock collec- 
tion. Our good discarded equipment we cached on Mt. Betty 
not far from Amundsen’s cairn. In a tin can within the cairn 
we left a note giving a brief account of the Expedition and the 
Geological Party. I left one of my rock hammers on top of the 
rock cairn we had built around the cache. 

On our homeward trip we decided to travel at night, both in 
order to have the sun behind us and because the sledging and 
skiing would generally be better than in the day. We had no 
relish for recrossing the crevasses in front of Liv’s Glacier, so 
we laid our course northeast from Strom Camp hoping to 
avoid them and to pick up our trail later when we were all out 
into the solid Barrier again. For several days clouds had 
hung over the Barrier and mountains, but as if for a good omen 
they lifted just as we were ready to leave Strom Camp at 
one o’clock on the morning of the 30th. 

Could you who read this have seen the picture that greeted 
us then, you would know that there had been much beside our 
geology and cartography to make the summer fascinating. To 
the south of us lay Mt. Nansen in all his splendor, his cap of 
shining ice, his blackish shoulders of bare rock loosely wrapped 
in a ragged old shawl, and the whole made glorious by the touch 
of the long skeletal fingers of the early morning sun. 

This grand old mountain had somehow come to hold the 


410 LITTLE AMERICA 


first place in our affections, and this sight was just what we 
would all have wished to keep as our last intimate view of the 
mountains. We finally turned our backs and headed north- 
ward toward Little America and home. 

Quite as we had planned we did miss the worst part of the 
crevassed area we had crossed when we had arrived at the 
mountains, and on the second day of travel we picked up our 
old trail. How much more easily we travelled along now than 
when southward bound. We had become much more adept on 
skis and the dogs were fairly lightly loaded. 

Two things furnished the principal variety on the home- 
ward trip until we were again in the crevassed region between 
latitudes 81 and 82. These were the weather and the char- 
acter of the Barrier surface as it affected sleding and skiing. 
For January 3rd I find the following entry in my log: 

“Now the morning sun is out and the sky is gorgeous with 
a great variety of ethereal cirri, and there is a bit of wind 
from the southeast. It has been overcast and foggy the whole 
night and most of the morning. In fact late in the morning 
there was a light fall of fluffy snow as though ‘the angels 
were moulting? We had to keep close together to keep each 
other in sight, and even then it frequently happened that we 
with the front sledge could not see the last sledge behind us. I 
had to watch the compass fairly closely and call directions to 
Mike occasionally in order to keep on the course. And I don’t 
believe we missed a single flag that we had previously placed 
to mark our trail. The thorough marking of the trail on our 
southbound trip was a good idea, and is already repaying us 
for the time we spent in doing the work. 

“We came by depot po. 6 shortly after noon and stopped 
only long enough to take on some dog pemmican and some man 
food.” 

And on the 4th the following: “Much hardest day we 
have had since leaving the mountains. Weak crust on the 
snow broke through under the dogs who plodded and wad- 
dled heavily along hauling sledges that went crushing their 
way through the snow rather than gliding over it easily. The 
dogs are already quiet. There will be no fighting amongst them 
tonight for they are very tired. A thin streak of clear sky to 
the south about midnight gave us one last glimpse of the 


THE GEOLOGICAL SLEDGE TRIP 411 


snow capped mountains which are now far behind and which 
none of us will likely ever see again.” 

We didn’t need to worry about the weather until we reached 
the crevassed region. On January toy the sky was overcast 
and things were pretty completely hidden from our view by a 
light fog. And we were nearing the broken area. I carefully 
watched the sledge meter and at what I thought was the proper 
time I said, “We’ll camp here.” We had the usual experience 
that we had encountered before in areas where there is active 
deformation of the ice. 

There was an almost constant fusilade as of rifle shots 
about and under us as the ice cracked under its tension. But 
in the middle of the night after the dogs and camp had been 
quiet for several hours I woke up and lay awake for a long 
time without hearing a sound. But when we got up in the 
morning and began moving about, the noises began all over 
again. Even though the Barrier is here some hundreds of 
feet thick, it appears that where we camped it was under such 
a delicate state of stress that our movements disturbed the 
equilibrium. When the clouds lifted we found that we had 
accidentally camped just between two goodly sized crevasses, 
either one of which we might easily have fallen into without 
skis. 

We had to abandon our former trail through the crevasses 
on account of the roofs of old ones on the former trail having 
fallen in and new ones having formed. We travelled three 
miles and had to stop on account of heavy fog. We waited 
two days for it to clear but it lightened only partially. Our 
dog food was getting so low that we could not stay longer with- 
out killing some dogs. We didn’t want to do that, so Nor- 
man, Mike, and I roped and started out on skis in an attempt 
to find a route we could follow out with safety. This we 
were able to do and hurriedly retracing our steps we broke 
camp and headed out. The next day we picked up our old trail 
just south of depot no. 3 as we had planned to do. 

The rest of the homeward journey was uneventful. On 
the 19th, in the early morning, we saw the tops of the radio 
towers at Little America. Only then did we have the feeling 
that we were nearly home—home from a sledge trip on which 
together with our many side trips we had covered more than 


412 LITTLE AMERICA 


1500 miles. Glad as we were to be back in the comparative 
luxury of Little America, it was with a feeling akin to the 
forlorn that we looked back at our sledge tracks disappearing 
into the limitless white to the south. We had had a good 
time and had, in some measure, known the joy of achievement. 


APPENDIX 


WINTER PARTY—LITTLE AMERICA, 


C. D. Alexander 
Bernt Balchen 
George H. Black 
Quin A. Blackburn 
Christoffer Braathen 
Kennard F. Bubier 
Jacob Bursey 
Richard E. Byrd 
Arnold H. Clark 
Francis D. Coman 
Frederick E. Crockett 
Victor H. Czegka 
Frank T. Davies 
Joe de Ganahl 

E. J. Demas 

James A. Feury 
Edward E. Goodale 
Charles F. Gould 
Laurence M. Gould 
William C. Haines 
Malcolm P. Hanson 
Henry T. Harrison, Jr. 
Harold I. June 
Charles E. Lofgren 
Howard F. Mason 
Ashley C. McKinley 
Thomas B. Mulroy 
John S. O’Brien 
Russell Owen 
Alton N. Parker 
Carl O. Petersen 
Martin Ronne 
Benjamin Roth 
Joseph T. Rucker 
Paul A. Siple 

Dean C. Smith 
Sverre Strom 


413 


414 APPENDIX 


George W. Tennant 
George A. Thorne, Jr. 
Willard Van der Veer 
Norman D. Vaughan 
Arthur T. Walden 


OFFICERS AND Crew Eleanor Bolling, YoyAlce BAX oF WHALES 
--Domepim, N. Z., FEBRUARY 1929. 


Captain Gustav L. Brown, Master 
Charles J. McGuinness, 1st Mate 

‚ Harry K. King, 2nd Mate 
Frank McPherson, Chief Engineer 
John Cody, 1st Assistant Engineer 
Elbert J. Thawley, 2nd Assistant Engineer 
Haldor Barnes, Medical Officer 
Lloyd K. Grenlie, Radio Engineer 
H. N. Shrimpton, Radio Operator 
Leland L. Barter 
John Buys 
Ben Denson 
Carroll B. Foster, Jr. 
Frank Fritzson 
Charles L. Kessler 
John Olsen 
A. Walker Perkins 
R. Perks 
George Sjogren 
Lyle Womack 


OFFICERS AND Crew, City of New York, Voyvace Bay oF 
WHALES—DUNEDIN, M. Z., FEBRUARY 22, 1929. 


Captain Frederick C. Melville, Master 
Bendik Johansen, Ice Pilot (also 2d mate) 
*Harry Adams, 156 Mate 

S. D. I. Erickson, 3d Mate 

Ralph F. Shropshire, Hydrographer 
Esmonde M. O’Brien, Chief Engineer 
John J. Bayer, Ist Assistant Engineer 
John L. Sutton, 2d Assistant Engineer 
Lloyd V. Berkner, Radio Engineer 
Arthur Berlin 

Max E. Boehning 


X Relieved Sverre Strom as Ist Mate, who stayed at Little America as 
a member of the Winter Party. 


APPENDIX 415 


Arthur B. Creagh 
William Gavronski 
Sydney Greason 
John Jacobson 
Richard W. Konter 
Louis Reichart 

S. Edward Roos 
Vaclav Vojtech 
Percy J. Wallis 


OFFICERS AND Crew Eleanor Bolling on Last VOYAGE, DUNEDIN, 
M. 2.—Movtnevm Ence or Ice PACK, FEBRUARY 1930. 


Captain Gustav L. Brown, Master 
Charles J. McGuinness, 1st Mate 
Harry Adams, 2d Mate 

Frank McPherson, Chief Engineer 
Elbert J. Thawley, 1st Assistant Engineer 
Leland L. Barter, 2d Assistant Engineer 
*Haldor Barnes, Medical Officer 
Lloyd K. Grenlie, Radio Engineer 
G. Samson, Radio Operator 

H. Austin 

D. Blair 

John Buys 

M. W. Dobson 

Carroll B. Foster, Jr. 

William Gavronski 

W. Harvey 

J. Jones 

Charles L. Kessler 

N. Newbold 

Frank Paape 

A. Walker Perkins 

B. Perks 

Louis Reichart 


OFFICERS AND CREW, City of New York, VOYAGE DUNEDIN, 
№. Z.—Bay ok WHALES, ARRIVING FEBRUARY 18, 1930, TO 
EMBARK WINTER Party. 


Captain Frederick C. Melville, Master 
Bendik Johansen, Ice Pilot and 1st Mate 
S. D. I. Erickson, 2d Mate 


* Services of medical officer loaned to S. S. Kosmos, as doctor had 
been lost in an airplane used by that vessel in connection with whaling 
operations. Dr. Barnes joined the Kosmos via the City of New York. 


APPENDIX 


A. B. Robinson, 3d Mate 

Esmonde M. O’Brien, Chief Engineer 
John J. Bayer, 1st Assistant Engineer 
John L. Sutton, 2d Assistant Engineer 
Hilton L. Willcox, Medical Officer 
Ralph F. Shropshire, Hydrographer 
Lloyd V. Berkner, Radio Engineer 

J. R. Orbell, Radio Operator 

W. J. Armstrong 

Arthur Berlin 

John R. Bird 

A. C. Brustad 

Arthur B. Creagh 

K. Eva 

W. Gribben 

Richard W. Konter 

Walter Leuthner 

E. Lockwood 

J. Robinson 

S. Edward Roos 

Alan Innes Taylor 

Vaclav Vojtech 

Percy Wallis 

M. C. Woolhouse 

R. Young 


A L O OAT 


INDEX 


Adams, Lieut. Harry, 72 

Adare, Cape, 44 

Adelie Land, wind velocities in, 13; 
minerals in, 39; discovery of, 42 

Admiralty mountain range, 43-4 

Aerial surveying, types of, 204-5 

Aircrait, problem of use of, in the 
Antarctic, 13 ff. 

Airplane exploration, cost of, 8; 
first flight over the Barrier, 102 ff.; 
to King Edward VII Land, 117 Ya.; 
discovery of the Rockefeller 
mountains, 124-5; second flight to 
the east and discovery of new 
land, named for Captain Scott, 
139 ff.; photographic mapping sur- 
vey of coast line, 143-4; Prof. 
Gould’s expedition for geological 
survey of Rockefeller mountains, 
167, 168, 170, 173, 174 ff.; Dase- 
laying flight preliminary to polar 
flight, 305 ff.; the flight to the 
South Pole, 326 ff.; flight of the 
Ford to the eastward of Little 
America, 346 ff. 


Airplanes, the expedition’s three, 
32-3 | 
Alexandra Mountains, 47 n., 106, 


121, 124, 350 

Alice W., Mount, 407 

America, trans-Atlantic flight of, 
14n. 

Amundsen, Roald, 14, 22, 24, 26, 35, 
47, 164, 166, 186n., 291, 311 ff., 331, 
332, 340, 341, 344; passage of 
southern ice pack, 18; tent left at 
South Pole by, found by Scott, 
22; first to reach South Pole, 
24n.; advice on project to reach 
South Pole by airplane, 24-5; on 
the Great Barrier as a base and 
his theory of the formation of 
Bay of Whales, 86; effort to lo- 
cate his camp in Bay of Whales, 
194-6; uses dogs for his dash for 
the South Pole, 240-1; moun- 
tains seen by, 249 and n.; finding 
of cairn left by, by Geological 
Party, 360, 408-9 3 | 

Amundsen-Ellsworth aerial expedi- 
tions in the Arctic, 14m. 

Andresen, Captain, 69, 361, 370 


417 


Antarctic, cost of expeditions to, 8; 
season of possible passage to the 
continent through the ice pack, 
12p.; problem of using aircraft 
in, 13 ff.; wind velocities in, 13- 
14; visibility conditions in, 15, 80; 
importance of coal in problem of 
basing in, 16; difficulties of reach- 
ing the continent through the ice 
pack, 17-18; economic resources 
of, and a brief sketch of its ex- 
ploration and our knowledge of, 
38 ff; ancient beliefs regarding, 
40-1; estimates of coastal limits 
of continent, 45; a continent still 
in the ice age, 46-7; deglacieriza- 
tion of, 46p.; winter tempera- 
tures, chot, I07, 230 fra) 273: el 
fect of the winter on personnel, 
197-9; the Antarctic night, 228, 
229; study of radio conditions in, 
208-9; center of the Antarctic ice 
sheet, 337; theory that Antarctic 
is not a continent but a series of 
islands, 346-7 

Arctic Expedition, the MacMillan, 
of 1925, 10; Amundsen-Ellsworth 
aerial expeditions in, 14 n. 

Aurora australis, 197, 224 n., 228-9 

Axel Heiberg Glacier, 243 n., 314, 
315, 316, 319, 330, 331, 332, 342, 
343, 347, 393, 402, 405 


Balchen, Bernt, senior in charge of 
aviation unit, 14 and n., 33, 79, 81, 
88, 02, 102, 118, 123, 124, 139, 167, 
320 ff. 

Balleny Islands, 18, 361 

Barnes, Dr. Haldor, assistant medi- 
cal officer, 31, 361, 391 

Barratt, Edgar, 155, 156 

Barratt, Roswell, 155, 156 

Base-laying flight in preparation for 
flight to South Pole, 305 ff. 

Bay of Whales, wind conditions 
make it a place of comparative 
safety for aircraft, 14; reasons for 
selection as base of expedition, 47; 
Murray’s description of, 84-5; 
Shackleton at, 84-5, 86; Amund- 
sen’s theory of formation of, 86; 


418 


Bay of Whales—Continued 
ice conditions in, 86-7; the expe- 
dition reaches, and establishment 
of base at, 87 ff.; Little America 
located at, 92; ground survey of, 
346, 376 1 

Bayer, Teddy, engineer on the City 
of New York, 100, 148 

Beardmore Glacier, 312, 313 

Beaufort Scale for measuring wind 
velocities, 13 m. 

Bellingshausen, Russian Admiral, 42 

Bennett, Floyd, 24, 33-4, 327, 341 

Berkner, Lloyd V., radio engineer, 
37, 139 

Berlin, Arthur, 107, 147 

Bernacchi, Cape, 39 n. 

Betty, Mount, 360, 408, 409 

Biltmore Hotel, New York, expedi- 
tion headquarters at, 25 

Black, George, supply officer, 92 

Blackburn, Quinn, topographer, 78, 
159-61, 216 

Bolling, Eleanor, cost of the ship 
and her outfitting, 11, 28; question 
of her fitness for service in the 
ice, 28; rough passage to Norfolk, 
30-2; start for New Zealand, 37; 
arrival at Dunedin, New Zealand, 
50; takes City in tow for the 
South, 55; returns to New Zea- 
land, 67; second trip South, 
tot 109: arrival al Bay oi 
Whales and unloading of, 126 ff.; 
narrow escape from destruction 
by falling ice from the Barrier, 
130-2; returns to New Zealand 
132, 137; third voyage south, 150, 
ff.; sets out again for south, 376; 
sent back for coal, 380; returns 
south, 386, 390, 301 

Boots for the Antarctic, 235-6 

Borchgrevink, winters in the Ant- 
ppo 44; at Bay of Whales, 85, 


Bowman, John McEntee, 25 

Braathen, Chris, 88, 97, 208 

Bremen relief flight, 14n. 

Brophy, Richard G., 25, 38, 52, 82, 
91, 161 

Brown, Captain Gustav, of the Elea- 
nor Bolling, 28, 31, 50, 67, 108, 
126, 127, 130, 137, 153, 155, 370, 
372, 380 

Bubier, Sergeant Kennard, aviation 
mechanic, 102, 212 

Bumstead sun compass, 314, 327 

Burrage, Admiral, 31 

Bursey, Jack, 59, 115, 162 


Camping equipment for sledge jour- 
neys, 258-60 
Carmen Land, the supposed, 47, 142, 


INDEX 


185, 311, 315, 318, 319, 320, 343, 
344, 359, 393, 396, 408 

Carnegie Institution, 264 

Chamberlin, Clarence, 103 

Charles V. Bob Mountains, 319 #. 

Cherry-Garrard, Apsley, 23, 40 M, 
207, 366 e 

City of New York, cost of the ship 
and her outfitting, 11, 28; former- 
ly named Samson, 25 and x; 
qualities and drawbacks of, 26-7; 
trip to New York across the At- 
lantic, 29-30; start for New Zea- 
land, 37; arrival at Dunedin, New 
Zealand, 52; departure for the 
South, 55; through the pack ice 
to Ross Sea in tow of the Larsen, 
70 ff.; in the Ross Sea and at the 
Great Ice Barrier, 77 ff.; at Bay 
of Whales, 87 ff.; unloading of, 
93 ff.; attempted explorations to 
the east in, abandoned, 137, 144- 
5; her departure for the north, 
147-8; her perilous northern voy- 
age, 150—5, 172, 173; starts south, 
364; beset by ice and storms, 367, 
368 ff.; wins through the pack, 
381; forced 300 miles off course 
by severe gales, 383 ff.; arrival at 
Bay of Whales and departure for 
north with the expedition, 388, 
389 ff. 

Clark, Arnold, 134, 211, 264 

Clark, Frank W., 34 

Clothing, Antarctic, 232 ff. 

Coal, importance of, in problem of 
basing in the Antarctic, 16 

Coal beds in south polar regions, 39 

Colbeck, Cape, 144, 349, 350 

Coman, Dr. Francis D., 21, 35, 209 

Commonwealth Bay, 13 

Cook, Captain James, 28; quoted on 
south polar regions, 39; discover- 
ies of, 41-2 

Copper, deposits in the Antarctic, 39 

Cost of polar expeditions, 8; of the 
Byrd expedition, 10-12 

Crab-eater seals, 99 

Creagh, Hump, 100 

Crevasses, 226—7 

Crockett, Frederick E., 22, 37, 162 

Crown Prince Olav range, 312, 316 

Czegka, Victor H., machinist, 156, 
202, 250, 260 


David, Prof. T. Edgeworth, 39-40, 


45 

Davies, Frank D., physicist, 37, 155, 
203, 264 

Daylight saving time in the Antarc- 
tic, 196, 280 

De Ganahl, Joe, 95, 131, 162, 208-301 


Demas, E. J., aviation mechanic, 59, 
102 


INDEX 


Denison, Cape, 13, 36 m. 

Depot laying expedition on the Bar- 
rier, 161-2, 163 H., 170, 172, 173-4 

Diaz, Bartholomew, 41 

Dietrichsen, Captain, 29, 30 

Discovery Harbor, 82 

Discovery Inlet, 78-80, 376, 390 

Dogs, the expedition’s, 34; sickness 
among cured by proper diet, 50-1; 
wisdom of liberal supply of, 91-2; 
in winter quarters, 189-01, 216-19; 
food for, on sledge journeys, 257-8 

Don Pedro Christophersen, Mount, 
315, 343 

Drake, Sir Francis, 41 

Duncan, Jim, of Dunedin, 49, 270 

Dunedin, New Zealand, 49 

D’Urville, Antarctic discoveries of, 
42 


Edsel Ford Range, 357 
Ellsworth, Lincoln, 24 
Erebus, Mount, 44 


Fairchild plane, the expedition’s, 33; 
unloading of 101-2; first flights 
of, 102 ff.; flight to King Edward 
VII Land in, 117 #.; second flight 
to the east, 139 ff.; rescue of 
Rockefeller Mountain geological 
expedition by, 176 ff.; winter 
quarters of, 188 

Falkland Islands, 42 

Ferrar, Hartley, 45 

Feury, Jim, fireman, 100 

Fisher, Lawrence P., 12 

Fisher Brothers, 12 

Fisher Mountain, 316 n., 317, 333, 


o use of as trail and base mark- 
ers, 166, 395-0 

Floyd Bennett, airplane, see Ford 
airplane 

Floyd Bennett Harbor, 103 

Fokker plane, the expedition’s, 33; 
successful trials of, 138; flight to 
the east, 139 ff.; expedition for 
geological survey of Rockefeller 
Mountains, 167; wrecked by 
storms, 180 ff. 

Ford, Edsel, 12 

Ford tri-motored airplane, the expe- 
dition’s, 32-3; unloading of at 
Bay of Whales, 128, 129, 132; 
winter quarters for, 188-9; prepa- 
ration for polar flight, 305 ff.; the 
base-laying flight, 309 H.; the 
flight to the Pole, 326 ff.; flight 
to the eastward of Little America, 
346 ff.; flight for study of Bar- 
rier, 370-7 Ky 

Fram, Amundsen’s ship, in southern 
ice pack, 18 


Framheim, Amundsen’s camp on 


419 


Bay of Whales, 86, 88, 89; effort 
to locate, 194-6 
Frost-bite, 191-2 


Gama, Vasco da, 41 

Gardiner, Binnie & Halliburton, of 
Wellington, 50 

Gatewood, Captain, 29 

Geological Party under Dr. Gould, 
and Supporting Party, pgepaga- 
tions for their journeys, 248 ff.; 
preliminary sledge trips and work 
of Supporting Party, 282 ff.; de- 
parture of Geological Party, and 
reports of its progress, 302, 304, 
306, 307 E., 323 ff., 346 ff. 365 ff.; 
return of party to Little America, 
374-5; Dr. Gould’s account of the 
trip and its scientific accomplish- 
ments, 303 ff. 

Goodale, Edward E., 22, 37, 162 

Gould, “Chips,” 100, 125, 155, 217 

Gould, Laurence M., Dr., 21, 37, 54, 
82, 92, 93, 134, 155, 209, 221, 272, 
279; made second in command 
of expedition, 81; air expedition 
for geological survey of Rocke- 
feller Mountains, 167, 168, 170, 
173, 174ff.; wreck of Fokker 
plane and rescue of party by the 
Fairchild, 180 ff.; preparations for 
journey of Southern or Geologi- 
cal Party, 248 ff.; preliminary 
sledge trips, 282 ff.; departure of 
the party and reports of its prog- 
ress, 302, 304, 306, 307 ff., 323 ff., 
346 ff., 365 ff.; return of party to 
Little America, 374-5; his ac- 
count of the Geological Party’s 
expedition and its scientific ac- 
complishments, 393 ff. 

Graham Land, 46, 347 

Greason, Sydney, commissary stew- 
ard, 35 

Great Ice Barrier, the, discovery of, 
44; the expedition reaches, 77-8; 
birthplace of icebergs, 78, 87; 
Amundsen on use of, as a base, 
86; exploration of, in the Fair- 
child plane, 102 ff., 117 ff. 

Grenlie, Lloyd, radio engineer, 37 

Guggenheim, Harry, 188 u. 


Haines, William C., meteorologist, 
37, 54, 67, 108, 116, 118, 170, 176, 
187, 231, 262, 274, 309, 321, 326 

Hal Flood Bay, 120 n., 130, 143, 349 

Hanson, Malcolm P., radio engin- 
Ger 30,530, №10, IST, 103, 267 

Harrison, Henry, meteorologist, 39, 
67, 131, 132, 200, 262, 326 

Haycocks, 297 

Hayes, “Antarctica,” cited, 8 n., 45 
n., 86 p. 


420 


Hope, Mount, 46 n. 


Icebergs, 65; formation of, 78, 87 

Ice pack, season of possible passage 
through to Ross Sea, 12 n.; dif- 
ficulties of reaching Antarctic 
continent through, 17-18; passage 
of City of New York through, in 
tow of Larsen, 70 ff. 

Influenza epidemic, 96 

Iron ore in the Antarctic, 39 


Japanese Antarctic Expedition, of 
1911, 47 p. 

Johansen, Bendik, pilot, 379 

June, Harold, 81, 102, 118, 139, 167, 
328 ff. 

Kennelly-Heaviside Layer, radio 
phenomenon, study of, 268-9 

Killer whales, 100, 111, 112 

King Edward VII Land, discovery 
of, 45, 47; flight to from Little 
America in the Fairchild airplane, 
PAPYA Hovo 

Konow, Magnus, 38 

Kosmos, whale ship, 390, 391 


Land, new, to the east of Bay of 
Whales, named for Captain Scott, 
142; east of 150% meridian 
named Marie Byrd Land, 351-7 

Larsen, C. A., Norwegian mother 
whale ship, services and assist- 
ance to expedition, O, 16, 17, to, 
28, 38, 49, 70, 76, 151 ff., 362, 390 

Lawrance, Charles L., 32 

Lichens, 404, 406 

Lindbergh Inlet, 105 

Little America, the expedition’s base 
on Bay of Whales, selection of 
the site, 92; removal of supplies 
to, 93 ff.; the trail to, 149; build- 
ing and organization of, 155 ff.; 
the various structures of, 156-7; 
snow tunnels connecting the vari- 
ous units, 158; the radio towers, 
158; the radio station, 163; winter 
at, 188 ff.; the dogs and their 
quarters, 189-01, 216-19; the win- 
ter routine and duties in prepara- 
tion for spring, 109 ff., 207 ff.; 
personalities and characteristics 
of, 208-16; games and other win- 
ter diversions, 219 ff.; winter 
weather conditions and tempera- 
ture record, 230-1; plans and 
preparations for the spring jour- 
neys and the polar flight, 241 ff.; 
return of the sun, 272; digging 
out, and preparing for southern 
journeys, 274 #.; fears that ice 
conditions may keep expedition at, 


INDEX 


another year, 365 ff.; dismantling 
of and departure from, 382-3, 387, 


388-9 . 

Liv’s Glacier, 315, 316, 317, 318, 320, 
330, 331, 332, 333, 345, 346, 347, 
399, 400, 401, 402 

Lofgren, Charles E., personnel of- 
ficer, 15, 38 


Macquario Island, 36n. 

Magellan, Strait of, 41 

Magnetic observations, 264-6 K 

Malcolm, Dr. John, of Otago Uni- 
versity, 51, 257, 395 

Marie Byrd Land, 357, 358, 359, 406, 
407, 408 

Mason, Howard F., radio engineer, 
30, 36-7 _. 

Mawson, Sir Douglas, abandons 
idea of using aircraft in the Ant- 
arctic, 13; on wind velocities in 
the Antarctic, 14; experience with 
motor transport, 34 p.; experiment 
with radio, 36 p.; quoted on polar 
research, 40; belief that Wilkes 
found Antarctic continent, 43 

McGuinness, Charles J., mate of the 
City of New York, 22, 37 

McKinley, Ashley C., aerial sur- 
veyor, third in command of the 
expedition, 21 and ya., 31, 37, 54, 
81, 92, 134, 142-4, 155, 185 p., 189, 
201, 204, 205, 209, 279, 327 ff., 


Bp. 

MacMillan Arctic Expedition of 
1925, To 

McMurdo Sound, 46 n., 86 

McPherson, Frank, Chief Engi- 
neer of the Bolling, 31 

Melville, Captain Frederick, in com- 
mand of the City of New York, 
37, 50, 147, 151, 152, 154, 364, 381, 
385, 386 

Meteorological observations, 262-4 

Mill, Dr. Hugh, “Siege of the South 
Pole,” cited, 39 p., 40 n. 

Mineral resources of the Antarctic, 
39-40 

Motor transport, the expedition’s, 
34; other explorers’ experience 
with, in the Antarctic, 34 n. 

Mulroy, Thomas B., chief engineer 
and fuel engineer, 16 and n. 

Murray, James, biologist of Shackle- 
ton’s 1908 expedition, 84 


Nansen, Fridtjof, 7, 20 

Nansen cooker, 200, 258 

Nansen, Mount, 314, 315, 316, 317, 
333, 334, 343, 344, 357, 396, 399, 
400, 402—4, 405, 409 

New Zealand, hospitality of its 
people, 49, 55 


INDEX 


Nilsen, Captain, of the whale ship 
C. A. Larsen, services and assist- 
ance to the expedition, iS, 3op, PD 
19, 49, 70-1, 76, 87, 151 E. 

Nilsen, Mount, 141 

N imrod, Shackleton’s ship, in south- 
ern ice pack, 18 

North Pole, first flight by air to, 24 

Nunatak Mountain, 121, 124, 349 


O’Brien, J. S., 397, 401 

Ochs, Adolf, 388 

Ole Englestad, Mount, 314, 315 

Owen, Russell, New York Times 
correspondent, 20, 38, 168, 192-3, 
222-3 


Parka, or Eskimo overcoat, 232-3 
Parker, Captain Alton, aviation 
pilot, 15 and n., 79, 81, 139 
Peary, Robert E., 24, 36 
Pemmican, 35 
Penguins, 73, 98-9, 358, 366, 367-8 
Personnel of the expedition, selec- 
tion of, 21-3 
Petersen; Carl O., 
37, 162 
Petrels, 303 
Photographic laboratory at Little 
America, and its operation, 201 ff. 
Photographs, aerial, geographical 
value of, 204 
Polar expeditions, cost of, 8 
Pressure ridges, 226, 249 n. 
pte A Lieut K. 47, tot, 124, 


radio engineer, 


349 
Prince Albert mountain range, 44 


Queen Maud Mountains, 33 n., 243 
p., 249, 255, 313, 318-19, 323, 330, 
344, 393, 396, 401, 408 


Radio, the expedition’s equipment, 
36-7, 367-9; ends isolation of 
polar exploration, 91, 143; com- 
munication with United States ef- 
fected, 116; the main station at 
Little America, 163; study of 
radio conditions in the Antarctic, 
268-9 

Radio beacon, 307 

Radio compass, 66; directional re- 
sults with, 307 

Railey, Captain Hilton Howell, 11 
and n., 25-6, 373, 377 

Rasmussen, Knud, 107 

Rockefeller, John D., Jr., 125 

Rockefeller Mountains, discovery 
of, 124-5, further exploration of, 
140-1; Prof. Gould’s air expedi- 
tion for geological survey of, 167, 
168, 170, 173, 174 #.; definite ‘loca- 
tion of, 185 n. 


421 


Ronne, Martin, 22, 208, 250 

Ross, Sir James Clark, first to break 
through the ice pack to Ross Sea, 
17-18; discoveries in the Ashagc. 
tic by, 42, 43-4 

Ross Ice Barrier, see Great Ice 
Barrier 

Ross Sea, season of possible pas- 
sage through ice pack to, 12 u. 
discovery of, 18, 43; the expedi- 
tion reaches, 76 ; ice islands in, 
122, 123 

Roth, Sergeant Benjamin, 38, 131 

Rucker, Joseph, photographer, 56, 
TOY 232 

Ruth Gade Mountain, 314, 315, 336, 
343, 344, 405, 407 


Sabine, Mount, 43 

Safety rules of the expedition, 82-4 

Sastrugi, 141, 171, 316, 318, 398, 399 

Scott, Captain Robert F., cost of his 
expeditions to the Antarctic, 8; 
difficulties in southern ice pack, 
18; finds tent left at South Pole 
by Amundsen, 22; experience with 
motor transport, 3a p.: use of tele- 
phone, 36 p.; mineral discoveries 
in the Antarctic, 39; discoveries 
on his first expedition, 45; at Bay 
of Whales, 85, 86; new land 
named for, 142; deaths of his 
party after reaching the South 
Pole, 240-1; at the Pole, 341 

Scott Island, 64, 122 

Scurvy, precautions against, 35-6 

Seal meat as food, 99, tot 

Seals, 71, 99, 168, 189 

Shackleton, Sir Ernest, cost of his 
second expedition to the Antarc- 
tic, 8; passage of southern ice 
pack in 1908, 18; experience with 
motor transport, 34 p.; mineral 
discoveries in the Antarctic, 39; 
at Bay of Whales, 84-5, 86 

Shropshire, Ralph, assistant to 
scientific staff, 38 

Siple, Paul, Boy Scout, 95, 112, 190 

Sir James Clark Ross, whaling ship, 


26, 37 : 

Skis, use of, for aircraft, 33 

Skua gulls, 99 

Sledge journeys, food and equip- 
ment for, 248 ff., 394-5 

Sledges, 251, 277 

Sleeping bags, 236-7 

Smith, Dean C., aviation pilot, 14, 
56, 81, 209, 317 

Smith, William, 29 

Snowfall record, 274 

Snowmobile, the expedition’s Ford, 
34, 134, 188, 285, 293, 294; loss 
of, 302, 303, 310 

South Georgia, 42 


422 


South Pole, Scott finds flag left by 
Amundsen at, 22; Amundsen first 
to reach, 24 n., 240-1; plans for 
the airplane flight to, 242 ff.; base- 
laying flight in preparation for 
flight to, 305 ff.; the successful 
flight to and return, 326 ff.; moun- 
tain ranges around, 336-7; alti- 
tude at, 340 

South Shetland Islands 42, 46 

South Victoria Land, 315, 316, 352 

Strom, Sverre, mate of the City of 
New York, 57, 61 

Sun, the last sight of, 196; the re- 
turn of, 272 

Sutton, John, tto 

Sverdrup, Dr. H. U., 225 u. 


Tapley, Hon. Harold L., 49, 161, 
270 

Temperature, Antarctic winter, 101, 
197, 230 ff., 273 5 

Tennant, George W., Chief Cook, 
35, 57, 125 

Terra Nova, Scott’s ship, in the ice 
pack, 18 

Terror, Mount, 44 

Thawley, E. J., 131, 132 

Thorne, George, 107 

Tierra del Fuego, 41 

Times, the New York, assistance of, 


36 


INDEX 


Todd, Herbert, 29 
Todd, William, 28 


Van der Veer, Willard, photogra- 
pher, 38, 56, 170, 171, 232 

Vaughan, Norman D., 22, 37, 51, 
114, 162 

Vermeli, Captain, of t Nilsen 
Alonzo, 370 ff., 372, 

Ver-sur-Mer Inlet, ta A: Whales, 
92, 149, 226, 358 

Visibility conditions in the Antarc- 
tic, 15, 80 


Walden, Arthur T., 34, 37 

Weddell Sea, 47 

Weddell seal, 99 

Wellington, New Zealand, 49, 50 

Whale meat a3 food, tot 

Whales in the Bay ‘of Whales, 99- 
100 

Whaling in the Antarctic, 39, 68 


Moa Christophersen, Mount, 
314, 3 
Wilkes, wenn Charles, explora- 


tions in the Antarctic, 42-3 
Wilkins, Sir Hubert, 46 
Wilson, Dr. Edward. Adrian, 45 
Wind Records, 225 
Wind velocities in the Antarctic, 
13-14 


i + 
Ba 


y. 
k. 
\ 


©. 
> 


|c Byrd, Richard Evelyn. 
‚850 Little America. 
„A3 


2,696 


ISSUED TO 


CAA a ChYLY FI 


Concordia College Library 
Bronxville, New York 10708 


ch u 
Ae پد کی نے‎ epe 


pans‏ عت 
i IE p‏ 

i hy 44 =. 

mb viyu aluk 


A 
u 
u, 


8 + 
DA KA seen ee ode dh 
PK) a caf 5 
< MED t Sire 


a 


b 
aptat ah > 


Trea 
am chuny 
ato 


g 3 HS 44 AY 
pue Da 
ENR re Neamt 
ate = - Po a 

pae out ree 


3 3 E ف‎ = cha y 
pel e 4 mola 4 is ch. 
kgm aam cha oy cen AA Ucto e e = 3 3 L ee, 


z sh pay pi + 
- a E y BARE Ua reas + u 63 t; 
el xye D) a ychy ine 3E AYa ATH mec eap 


